---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: "A Touching Taxonomy"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">A Touching Taxonomy</h2>
  </div>
  by Cameron Betts
</header>

If I accept your physical role-play, if I consent to your touch, what
are you going to do? Clap me on the shoulder? Slap me? Hug me? I would
like to know.

What kind of physical interaction would you appreciate from me? I would
like to know that too.

Not all forms of touch are the same.

They are not the same from a player perspective. They are not the same
from a design perspective. Touch interacts with LARP design. Touch plays
a role in a LARP. The right form of touch at the right time can create a
sense of presence and authenticity; the wrong kind of touch, even
outside of ethical concerns, can pull a player out of the experience.

Here are four types of touch that we see in LARP: normative touch, game
necessary touch, design enhancing touch, and individual enhancing touch.
Each type of touch interacts with the game differently, and by thinking
about how to handle each, a designer can help ensure that players
experience the right form of touch (and avoid the wrong form).

#### Normative Touch

This is the kind of touching that we encounter in the world outside of
LARP—at work, at home, or among friends—that bleeds into our
expectations and gameplay. A typical example might be using a handshake
to greet a stranger. Normative touch is difficult to control with rules
because players don’t even think about the action as one that requires
asking consent, considering a rule, or deploying a technique. Even in a
LARP where there is a no-touching rule, it is common to see people
shaking hands.

In groups where a high percentage of the players know one another,
sub-culture norms can override the norms of the broader culture—it is
not uncommon to see normative hugging in such groups. Interacting with
differences in cultural normative touch can create serious challenges
when one player considers a touch normative and another does not;
consider, for example, kissing on the cheeks or hugging as a form of
greeting. A player for whom this is a normative interaction may hug
another player without asking consent because they are acting on
“auto-pilot”.

How much touch is encouraged or allowed in a design can also alter the
norms of touch in a LARP. For example, in some live-combat games,
players routinely touch one another’s shoulders to indicate that they
are carrying that person or performing some in-game action on them. This
action becomes normative in the culture of play for the LARP, and
players no longer stop to think about if this touch requires consent.

#### Necessary Touch

Sometimes a game design requires players to touch one another in order
for the design to be realized. There have been several games about
ballroom dancing that require touch that is normal for dancing. Live
combat games require players to accept touch via padded weapons (which
may not seem like touch from one point of view, but consider if it is
acceptable without consent).

Necessary touch needs to be very well indicated in the description of
the LARP or scene, so that all participants understand what is required.

In some designs, there are ways for a percentage of participants to opt
out of necessary touch, but it is still necessary touch if the design
relies on high percentage of people participating in the touching
activity.

### Design Enhancing Touch

This is the level of touch that the design would like to optimize for,
but that would not harm the LARP if any given or all players opted not
to engage in. These are actions that your players will likely encounter
due to the scenario or situations the designers intend for them. Design
enhancing touch speaks to the overall themes of the LARP.

The line between necessary and design-enhancing touch is sometimes
blurry, as they both relate to the designed intentions of the scenario.
The difference is that design-enhancing touch can be replaced if the
situation calls for it; perhaps it can be just removed or it can be
replaced with a non-touch-based technique.

An example is a game set at a ball, but the plot is all about politics.
It would be great if people participated in some ballroom dancing to
enhance the atmosphere, but the game will be engaging, interesting, and
complete even if no one dances. Another example might be in a gritty
combat game where it can add to the atmosphere if the players physically
drag or carry the wounded to safety.

### Individual Enhancing Touch

When we talk about touch and consent rules, we are often talking about
this type of touch. This is when players sense an opportunity for touch
to enhance their experience. Imagine a moment where a character is
grieving, and the player of another character thinks a hug would add to
the experience.

Since this kind of touch in very dependent on specific scenes and
context, the process of suggesting appropriate individual enhancing
touch is challenging. Most LARPs use an open-ended system for requesting
consent to deal with this. Many systems involve an in-the-moment,
out-of-character conversation, which can be as simple as “do you accept
my physical roleplay?” or as comprehensive as a structured conversation
to ensure that players don’t feel pressured to consent. Many systems
also accept that consent conversations can be streamlined with
negotiation before play begins.

While individual enhancing touch can add to the player experience, it is
also possible that it can detract from the LARP design. Imagine a LARP
in a formal setting about characters from a reserved culture, where a
some of the players decided act out a bar brawl. Although open ended
consent negotiations are needed, it might be worth the designer
considering if there are some actions or categories of action that
should be disallowed.

### The A-B-Cs of a Touching LARP

Here is one way to handle creating a permission space around touch that
addresses all of these forms explicitly: players select which forms of
touch they would like to opt into. In order to make this simple to use,
the forms are placed on a scale of intimacy, tied to specific
game-related types of touching. Players wear an indicator of what they
would like to opt into; I suggest a letter that they wear in a visible
and consistent location. Players can change the letter they are
displaying at any time.

Thinking through the forms of touch and their role in the LARP can help
you achieve the LARP you want to produce. Being specific in the levels
allows the players to feel confident that the others have opted in to
some action, and is suggestive of what kind of play is expected as well
as what the players might witness during the course of play.

A game that suggests that grasping forearms is a common greeting feels
different from one where a kiss on each cheek is common. A culture where
you are more likely to be punched than hugged feel different where one
where you are more likely to be hugged than punched. Using this A-B-C
method the designer can determine for their LARP what kinds of touch are
common and what is an escalation.

Two restrictions are included in this system for the sake of usability.
First, the touch is placed on a scale, which means players can’t easily
opt into some things and not others. They only indicate that they are
consenting to all up until a certain point. Second, each player’s letter
indicator needs to apply to every other player. These restrictions allow
the communication of consent to be simple to display and to understand
since there not a series of special conditions for players to remember.
To mitigate these restrictions, the plays may also wear a symbol to
indicate they are open to explore and negotiate opportunities.

Here is an example of how this system might look for a ballroom-dancing
LARP, with each display letter A-D defined and discussed.

#### A - No Touch

*No touching means no touching at all.*

*No touching at all* is hard to achieve, and is a weakness of this
system. The nature of normative touch is that people don’t stop to think
about think it before they do it. Nevertheless, there should be a way
indicate that a player has not opted in to any touch, and they should
have organizer support. I would reserve the “A” for no-touching, even if
your game has a minimal touch requirement. If our ballroom-dancing LARP
includes some characters for whom dancing is optional, then this is an
option for the players of those characters.

If you would like to maximize your chance of a touch-averse player not
getting touched at all, not even normatively, the best way is to have a
game where touch is specifically forbidden to all players, and where the
characters also have specific reasons not to touch each other.

#### B - Ballroom Dancing

*In order for our ballroom-dancing LARP to work, we need people to
dance. Putting on a “B” indicates that you have opted-in to being
touched on the arms, hands and waist in the context of dancing with a
partner.*

This level is for *Necessary Touch.* Including the context of the touch
can be important, as opting in to dancing with someone is not the same
as opting in to being suddenly grabbed by the waist.

In games that do not have a necessary touch, “B” can be used to indicate
that the player opts-in to normative touch for that game. You should
still define what is considered normative for the space you are creating
so that players have a baseline of understanding what this means (e.g.
handshakes).

#### C - Slapping

*While our ballroom-dancing LARP is set at a ball, it is really about
politics and scandal. Loud and dramatic scandal. So, if player displays
a “C”, they opt-in to being lightly slapped on the cheek, in addition to
opting-in to the necessary touch of ballroom dancing described in “B”.*

This level is for *design enhancing touch*. Be specific in describing
the design enhancing touch actions, and (just like with necessary touch)
give some context as to how the touch is to be used in play. Players are
much more likely to take actions that are specifically called out with a
letter.

#### D - Shoving

*Scandal and dancing might cause bitter rivalries to boil over. If a*
*player displays a “D”, they opt-in to being pushed, shoved, or knocked
down, as well as opting in to the necessary touch of ballroom dancing of
“B”, and the light slapping of “C”.*

Some games can benefit from having multiple levels of *design enhancing
touch*. This example shows that the designer has decided that opting in
to the “C” level is a prerequisite for the “D” level. While there may be
players that are happy to opt in to being shoved (“D”), who don’t want
to be slapped (“C”), having a simple hierarchy allows for players to
remember fewer things and works better than having a player wear
multiple symbols for different configuration of actions. The hierarchy
also communicates to the players what actions, in the context of this
LARP, are more common and which are escalations.

#### Plus (“+”) - Open to Explore Opportunities

*Sometimes lovers embrace after a fight. Sometimes mothers march their
sons out of the ball by their ears. Those might be fun to play out, but
you need to make sure all the players involved opt-in. If a player
displays a “+” after their letter, they are open to discussing different
forms of touch on a case-by-case basis other than what is described in
the other letters. Any letter can be followed by a plus.*

This is the *Individual Enhancing Touch* and allows players to have some
flexibility in their actions and experiences. A player who does not want
to dance but who might opt-in to a slap-fight can display an “A+”. A
player who wants to dance and embrace their romantic interest but does
not want any form of violence, can display a “B+”.

Including the plus in as an option means you might need additional
guidelines for how to negotiate consent. If a player does not have a “+”
the other players should not approach them about negotiating more touch
than their letter indicates. The more the designer can fit into the
lettered structure the less the players will need to stop play to
negotiate.

### Making Consent Visible

In addition to providing a structure for consent between players for
using touch in their roleplay, this system also makes visible and
explicit the consent structures that drive touch in during play. With
less visible structures, such as arranging for consent before the game,
there is a risk that some players will see others touching and assume
that this level of touch is normal, expected, or desired.

Consider a situation where two players consent in private discussion
before the game to exchange casual back rubs during play as a sign of
that their characters are close. Another player watches as one of the
consenting players step up behind the other to rub their shoulders
without any obvious consent negotiation. The watcher might assume these
two players enjoy backrubs and initiate one in the same way they saw
modeled (without asking consent); or they might assume that this is
normal behavior for players playing characters in close relationships
and step up behind someone else. Of course, our watcher might also
assume that no consent has been given for the backrub. They might then
intercede, and disrupt a moment the consenting players had been hoping
for.

In this example, the consenting players inadvertently end up modeling a
flawed consent structure because their consent negation was not
discernible by an observer. This problem can be exacerbated in
situations where some players know one another before play and others do
not. The former more easily can have invisible consent negotiations
while the latter may be attempting to figure out what is the norm for
play with this group. The ease with which players who know one another
can pre-negotiate can also create a feeling in newcomers that they are
boxed out or not able to have as complete an experience as those with
established friends.

Using a structured, visible consent system allows the free flow of
physical play within the comfort and consent of all the players
involved, and considering touch as an intentional design tool can help
players get the most out of a LARP.
