---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: "Arrival at Tau Ceti"
columns: false
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Arrival at Tau Ceti</h2>
  </div>
  by Ivan Žalac, 2018
</header>

Arrival at Tau Ceti is a short, sci-fi chamber larp for 6-15 players.
The person who’s running the game can also play. It requires:

**Environment**: 1 room, as isolated as possible.

**Props**: Anything tech related is welcome. Something to represent the
navigation console is recommended. You also need some way of presenting
reports - whether on screen, tablet or paper. Something to write
character names on - name tags, blackboard, large screen etc.

**Time**: Total of 2-3 hours, depending on number of players. 2 hours is
enough for 6-8 players, 3 for 9+. Half of the time is used for prep and
character creation, half for larp play.

### Backstory (read aloud to players):

In the early 22nd century, the first manned interstellar mission
launched. Starship Prometheus, a nuclear-powered interstellar ship,
started its’ journey to the nearby Tau Ceti system, calculated to have
the largest number of potentially colonizable worlds. Prometheus was
equipped with the state-of-the-art technology named the seed factory, an
autonomous piece of technology capable of mining almost any surface for
materials and manufacturing an entire colony autonomously. Its second
payload was a pod containing 100,000 frozen embryos. It also carried a
skeleton crew of 4, enough to maintain critical systems, and eventually
set up the colony. During the launch, a probe was sent to another nearby
system - YZ Ceti - in order to provide the crew more information and
options in case Tau Ceti is unsuitable for colonization.

Yet the journey was long, and there was no way for the first generation
to survive the entire 50-year trip. The first generation, despite their
training didn’t take that well to the realities of confined life. In
addition, they encountered a magnetic storm in interstellar space. Since
the main engines were off by that time, they jury-rigged the solar sail
to provide lateral thrust which returned them on course. During that
incident, many of them received lethal doses of radiation, leaving their
untrained children to run the ship, while they went to the recycling
facilities to ensure enough resources for the second generation.

The second generation ran a bit wild without their parents’ guidance,
not learning (or understanding) enough of the ship’s systems. They ended
up having too many children of their own, overpopulating the Prometheus,
which taxed the life support systems beyond their operational
parameters. Once they realized their error, they went and recycled
themselves as well, passing their wisdom to the third generation.

You’re playing the third generation of the crew. You’ve been on this
ship since the day you were born, and you know your way around it mostly
by instinct. 15 years ago, you lost all contact with Earth without
warning. Now you’re on approach to the Tau Ceti system. The ship is
decelerating towards Tau Ceti 3, which is currently providing you with
gravity, ETA is 20 hours at your current rate. You will soon receive
scanning reports from Tau Ceti - as well as the YZ Ceti probe - allowing
you to make an informed decision on where to land. The window for course
change is short, as if you delay too much you will lose too much fuel…

### Rules for this larp:

1. All play is based on improvisation. There are no mechanics for any actions - you can do what you can do.
2. If you wish to play violence or intimacy with another player, you must agree with them how you will play it. Don’t cross boundaries - no means no.
3. Course change can be entered at any point. Ship’s final destination will be the final course set at the end of the larp. Should you decide to go to YZ Ceti, the trip will take 6 more years, and one more person will need to be “recycled” in order to get there.
3. There’s no privacy on such a small ship. Or secret. Everyone knows your private moments, and you know theirs. If something interesting happens on this larp, make sure to share it with all other players during the play.
4. There’s no “right” decisions, or “solving” this larp - it’s about experience and creating interesting situations for everyone involved.
5. You can play in “casual” mode, in which the spaceflight operations crew interprets the reports any way they see as correct, or in “science” mode, if you have players familiar with orbital mechanics. Or Kerbal Space Program.

### Player setup

Divide players into two families of equal size, approximately according
to player gender balance. Each family consists of brothers and sisters -
but characters from opposite families are cousins. Decide on family and
character names and write them down.

Sort out the characters into three specializations. While everyone knows
how to perform the basics of all operations required for the mission,
all characters are experts in one of the three areas. Read them the
following text:

#### Spaceflight Operations

Piloting, navigation, mechanics, maintenance - you have been most
crucial crewmembers so far, but this situation is likely to change once
the landing is complete. Your skillset will become redundant, and you’re
about to drop from the top of the ship status to the bottom of it. It
will be hard to deal with - all your life suddenly becoming redundant.
Sure, you’ll spend the next few years in the habitat module, but after
that you’ll be useless.

Maybe you’d keep your status for a few more years if you change the
course to YZ Ceti… to the unknown. The only problem is: not all of you
will be able to make it there. One person will need to get recycled to
compensate for the deteriorating life support systems...

#### Ground Operations

The landing. You’ve trained most of your life for what will happen
after. Geology, agronomy, industrial production… and helping to bring up
and raise the children, who will be born in the new world.

You spent a lot of your youth reading about Earth, looking at pictures
of it. You’ve been dreaming about the sky and sea - and you really hope
to have something like that when you get there. New Earth - you hope
you’ll find it and land there. It’s a dream and a risk worth taking.

This will finally allow you to put your skills to use - you couldn’t
help but feeling somewhat useless compared to others, considering most
of your skillset is ground-related. That is about to change!

#### Medical

Doctor. Dentist. Nutritionist. Personal trainer. Caretaker.
Psychologist. You’re all of that and more - you kept the crew safe and
healthy (mentally and physically), leading by example, and you’re ready
to deliver some babies to the new world.

Also, you feel like few others can seem to see the big picture. You know
your priorities, and the priorities of others even when they don’t know
it by themselves, and that is: safety first. Avoid risks and always go
with what you know to be safe and certain. Keeping others safe and
healthy is what you trained for your entire life.

### Characterization

*Optional*: Lost sibling - if the number of players is odd, the smaller
family had a brother or sister (choose a name). A year ago they tried to
take over the ship, using gossip to consolidate their power. As there
are no secrets on the ship, it was eventually found out, and everybody
shunned them. They were depressed, and took their own life, recycling
themselves…

Ask each character the following question, the answers should be brief
and completely improvised, from the character’s standpoint:

* What was the one scene on the ship you’ll never forget? Include yourself and another character in it.

Then follow up with one or two more questions, depending on how much
time you have left. You can select from the questions below, or a
question of your own, depending on the general mood.

* Who’s your best buddy and why?
* Do you blame someone for something?
* Who’s your ex, and what went wrong with the two of you?
* Who are you currently in a relationship with?
* What do you think, why have you lost contact with Earth?

### Play

Once the questions are done, you’re ready to start the larp. Explain the
schedule to everyone, and then play it:

**Beginning** - casual introduction and role-play. Medical team should
run a series of exercises to keep the entire crew happy (adjust to
actual physical conditions of the players, and the room used for play).

**Half-point** - Tau Ceti report arrives (the organizer presents it to
characters). YZ Ceti report arrives 10 minutes later.

**End** - players tell the ending cooperatively. Spaceflight crew tell
the story about the arrival to their chosen destination, landing, and
any troubles along the way. Ground crew tell the story about
establishing and growth of the colony, and any troubles along the way.
Medical crew tell the story of the colony 100 years in the future - as
well as if the contact with Earth was ever re-established.

<header class="article-header page-break-before" style="margin-top: 3em;">
  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Report</h2>
  </div>
  - TAU CETI SYSTEM ANALYSIS -
</header>

### Tau Ceti

Spectral type G8 V; U−B color index +0,21; B−V color index +0,72; Mass
0,783±0,012 M☉; Radius 0,793±0,004 R☉; Luminosity 0,52±0,03 L☉;
Luminosity (visual, LV) 0,45 L☉; Surface gravity (log g) 4,4 cgs;
Temperature 5344±50 K; Metallicity 28±3% Sun; Metallicity \[Fe/H\]
−0,55±0,05 dex; Rotation 34 days; Age 5,8 Gyr

**Debris disk** at 4,6-52,3 AU (2295-25950 Ls), 879271 bodies
(r&gt;50km) detected and catalogued at first scan.

<div class="text-center" style="margin-top: 2em;">
  - MAJOR PLANETS -
</div>

### Tau Ceti 1

Mass: 1,73 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,133 AU (66,36 Ls); Orbital period: 20
days; Eccentricity: 0,06; Radius: 1,52 E-r; Surface gravity: 0,75g;
Atmosphere: -; Temp: 750K; Moons (r&gt;1km; e&lt;1): 3

*Analysis: non-candidate due to insolation, temperature, radiation, and
trace atmosphere. Mercury-like world.*

### Tau Ceti 2

Mass: 1,63 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,243 AU (121,25 Ls); Orbital period:
49,4 days; Eccentricity: 0,23; Radius: 0,82 E-r; Surface gravity: 2,38g;
Atmosphere: 91% CO2, 8% SO2, 123 bar; Temp: 730K; Moons (r&gt;1km;
e&lt;1): 1

*Analysis: non-candidate, non-landable due to temperature, gravity and a
runaway greenhouse effect atmosphere. Venus-like world.*

### Tau Ceti 3

Mass: 3,52 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,538 AU (268,46 Ls); Orbital period: 163
days; Eccentricity: 0,18; Radius: 1,61 E-r; Surface gravity: 1,36g;
Atmosphere: 88% N2, 11% O2, 1,9 bar; Temp: 340K; Moons (r&gt;1km;
e&lt;1): 0

**DANGER**: ABLATION CASCADE EFFECT DETECTED IN ORBIT, FRAGMENT
COMPOSITION: 70% ROCKY 23% METALLIC 7% ICY. Suggested cause: moon
breakdown. Probability of successful landing without habitat module
being disintegrated by fragments: 38,21%.

*Analysis: Surface water and magnetosphere detected. Earth-like world
suitable for human life with minimal protection requirements in polar
regions. High risk of unsuccessful landing.*

### Tau Ceti 4

Mass: 5 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 1,29 AU (643,72 Ls); Orbital period: 630
days; Eccentricity: 0,16; Radius: 3,12 E-r; Surface gravity: 0,51g;
Atmosphere: 79% Ne, 21% CO2, 0,02 bar; Temp: 203K; Moons (r&gt;1km;
e&lt;1): 1

*Analysis: Water-ice crust surface, no magnetosphere, non-terraformable.
Survivable equatorial regions in shielded habitat mode (shipbound or
built using the seed factory).*

<header class="article-header page-break-before" style="margin-top: 3em;">
  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Report</h2>
  </div>
  - YZ CETI SYSTEM ANALYSIS -
</header>

### YZ Ceti

Spectral type M4.0Ve; U−B color index +1,43; B−V color index +1,811;
Mass 0,13 M☉; Radius 0,168 R☉; Temperature 3056 K; Metallicity \[Fe/H\]
−0,26 dex;

<div class="text-center" style="margin-top: 2em;">
  - MAJOR PLANETS -
</div>

### YZ Ceti 1

Mass: 0,76 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,015 AU (121,25 Ls); Orbital period: 2
days; Eccentricity: 0,01; Radius: 0,82 E-r; Surface gravity: 1,13g;
Atmosphere: -; Temp: 510K; Moons (r&gt;1km; e&lt;1): 0

*Analysis: non-candidate due to insolation, temperature, radiation, and
trace atmosphere. Mercury-like world, non-terraformable.*

### YZ Ceti 2

Mass: 0,99 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,02 AU (268,46 Ls); Orbital period: 3,06
days; Eccentricity: 0,05; Radius: 0,8 E-r; Surface gravity: 1,55g;
Atmosphere: 100% CO2, 73 bar; Temp: 480K; Moons (r&gt;1km; e&lt;1): 0

*Analysis: non-candidate, non-landable due to temperature and a runaway
greenhouse effect atmosphere. Venus-like world, non-terraformable.*

### YZ Ceti 3

Mass: 1,14 M⊕; Semimajor axis: 0,029 AU (643,72 Ls); Orbital period:
4,66 days; Eccentricity: 0,04; Radius: 1,4 E-r; Surface gravity: 0,58g;
Atmosphere: 89% O2, 8% Ar, 3% H2O 0,4 bar; Temp: 360K; Moons (r&gt;1km;
e&lt;1): 0

*Analysis: Surface water detected in polar regions, magnetosphere
detected. Colonizable world with terraformable polar region valleys,
with human-breathable air. Human life supported - thermal insulation
required due to high temperatures.*
