---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: Editor's Note
---

<header>
  <div class="midline">
    <div class="midline-line left"></div>
    <h1 class="text-uppercase">Editor's Note</h1>
  </div>
</header>

<img src="/vol3/images/editors-note-portrait.jpg" alt="Viktoriya Fuzaylova" class="editors-note-portrait" />

Welcome, readers, to the third volume of Game Wrap.

As our thinking about what this publication could be evolved, we decided
to introduce something of a theme for each volume both to inspire
authors as they plan their contributions and frame the conversation
across the articles and in the spaces between. This year the theme we
put forth is Trial and Error, to acknowledge and celebrate the
experimental and ever refining nature of larp as a developing art form
or medium, and indeed the often challenging but exhilarating work being
done in all the various larp communities across the globe.

We are introduced in this volume to the unique history and state of the
art of larp in Croatia in Ivan Zalac’s article about his larp community.
He places its development in the larger context of European larp,
highlights some exciting projects coming out of Croatia, and shares one
of his games. Andrea Humez lays out some analysis of the design
considerations that go into plotting out in-character interpersonal
relationships in larps with pre-written characters, and distills this
thinking into useful principles that can be implemented in the design
and writing process as well as through run time. In another article,
Cameron Betts reflects on his many years larping to formulate a taxonomy
of the kinds of touch that commonly occur in games to begin to organize
our collective thinking about how touch may be more consciously used in
larp design and in individual role-playing choices.

In the New England theater-style larp community the past couple of years
have seen a new focus on how gender is approached in larps and how it
can better be engaged with on the administrative and production levels
of running larp conventions and individual larps, and in casting and
writing games. Eva Schiffer’s article presents a technological approach
to addressing character gender in a flexible and adaptable way such that
the game is able to better accommodate players rather than players being
tasked with taking on ill-fitting gendered roles. The article is
accompanied here with a short larp as an illustration of how this can be
incorporated into the writing process, and in the digital version of the
volume with a link to the original software that enacts this
flexibility.

The theme of Trial and Error is perhaps most starkly reflected in the
article from two of our very own staff members as a narrative about
their process of rewriting a larp after several successful runs to
better represent the growth in their thinking about social justice, the
role larp is able to take on in social justice activism, the limitations
therein, and the growth in their understanding of current scientific
theories. What they present is their own elegant solution, and an open
question for the rest of us about how older larps can be reworked to
answer the needs of the current larp scene and a more politically aware
society.

One of the main changes we on the editorial staff made this year, as we
learn from our own past experiences and address problems, is to refine
our submission process to be more helpful to contributors and
accommodate different writing styles. As we continue this process we are
starting to offer the option of skipping the abstract submission step,
and accept articles for consideration in full, as well as streamlining
our editing process so as to provide faster turnaround. It is our hope
that these changes will help include more voices and allow our greater
community the advantages of learning about more perspectives and
experiences.

I hope you enjoy reading the materials included in this volume as much
as I have, and find them equally as edifying, and I look forward to
seeing the ideas they spark in your minds for future articles. I’d like
to extend a great big thank you to the hard-working staff of Game Wrap
and NEIL for their continued support.

Thoughtfully yours,

Viktoriya Fuzaylova, Editor-in-Chief
