---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: "On the Same Page: A GM’s Guide to Creating Successful Relationship Plots"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">On the Same Page</h2>
    A GM’s Guide to Creating Successful Relationship Plots
  </div>
  by Andrea Humez
</header>

### Three Key Principles for Creating Successful Relationship Plots

Although LARP plots focused on romance, family or any other intimate
relationship among characters have historically been treated as
secondary or optional in some LARP traditions, they have always been
popular with some players, while other LARP traditions center narrative
and play almost exclusively around intimate relationships. However, most
players can attest to the hit-or-miss nature of relationship plots, and
the frustration of being involved in a relationship plot that fails to
fulfill its promise of dramatic or intensely emotional play. As with any
other LARP element, relationship plots can be improved through
thoughtful design and implementation.

In this article, I describe three key design principles for supporting
satisfying relationship play, and suggest ways in which GMs can use
these principles during writing, casting, pre-game and run-time. I draw
on my experiences playing with the MIT Assassins’ Guild, at Intercon and
related communities, and in some recent US or UK-run high-transparency,
rules-light, weekend-long games that members of our communities have
been involved in.

In our LARPing communities, players have always had a wide range of
expectations about what relationship plots are. Depending on the game
and the player, players may see relationship plots as:

* a way to make a character well-rounded,
* an opportunity for intense emotional interactions with other characters,
* an opportunity for comfort and care-taking,
* an opportunity for dysfunctional characters to show their worst sides,
* a plot arc with a problem to be resolved leading to a narratively
satisfying resolution, or
* something to do when players are at a loose end during game play.

I suspect that diversity of expectations is becoming an even greater
issue now, as players cross over between communities with a tradition of
secrets-based, highly-plotted, GM-written games, and those with a
tradition of high-transparency, loosely-plotted games in which players
negotiate and collaborate to pre-write content. With communities having
different norms for what “plot” looks like and how relationships among
characters work, players may arrive at a given game with differing
expectations and not be aware of where the differences lie.

For a relationship plot to lead to satisfying play, the players need to
have compatible expectations about how to play together, and they need
to fulfill those expectations for each other. Their expectations also
need to be aligned with the constraints and affordances of their
characters and the game structure. As with other aspects of game design
and implementation, both GMs and players can contribute to the alignment
of expectations. The following three design principles can be used by
both GMs and players to improve relationship play. This article will
focus on the GMs’ perspective, suggesting ways in which GMs can use
these design principles during writing, casting, pre-game planning, and
play to create successful relationship plots.

#### *Principle 1: Players (and characters) in a relationship plot must be motivated to interact with each other*

LARPs are fundamentally made up of interactions among characters. The
primary purpose of relationship plots, in particular, is to foster
interesting interpersonal interactions, often involving intense feelings
and emotional arcs for the characters involved. If characters are not
interacting, the relationship plot is not happening. However, players do
not always choose to engage with their characters’ relationship plots.
Even when players do share the expectation that they will interact with
their relationship partners, it can be difficult for them to do so if
the structure of the game hinders, rather than facilitates, such
interactions. For example, relationship play often fizzles when
characters are motivated to avoid each other, do not have goals or
conflict to drive dramatic interactions, or have so many demands on
their time that they can’t arrange opportunities to talk to their
relationship partners.

#### *Principle 2: The relationship should be about the same level of priority for all the players (and characters) involved.*

Even when all involved players expect to interact with each other, there
can still be wide gulfs in the extent to which they prioritize the
relationship plot. Prioritization has two related aspects. The first is,
how much **time** does a player want to devote to this relationship, and
in particular, how much time do they want to spend **interacting** with
the other character(s) in the relationship? Some players want
relationship play to be a major focus of their game. For others,
relationships are a secondary or background plot, which they enjoy but
only want to spend a limited amount of time on. The second consideration
is how much **emotional investment** does the player have in the
relationship plot? Emotional investment is partly a question of how
committed each player is to the relationship plot: if time is scarce or
other plots demand attention, will the player continue to make time for
it? It is also a question of the extent to which each player is
emotionally engaged with the relationship play and the play experience.
As in real life relationships, players who make themselves emotionally
vulnerable during play need to be able to trust their partners, as
players, to take care of them. They also need to be able to trust that
the intense emotional experience they share with other players is, in
fact, shared; that “we’re all in this together,” and that their partners
are also emotionally affected by the experience. The pain of
in-character rejection or betrayal or incompatibility can be fun to play
with, but no one enjoys the player-level experience of discovering that
they were alone in feelings they thought were shared. Although GMs
cannot, of course, control players’ feelings, they can use design,
casting, and communication strategies to increase the chances that
players enter the game with compatible expectations that can serve as
the foundation for trust.

#### *Principle 3: Players in a relationship plot should have similar expectations about the type of play they will engage in together*

Relationship play is most likely to be satisfying for all concerned when
players share expectations about the level of **emotional intensity**
they are looking for, and the **content**, **themes**, or **style** they
want to explore or avoid. For example, a romance plot may involve
flirtation, seduction, sexual content, conflict between the
participants, jealousy, infidelity, polyamory, romantic comedy, pining,
kink, power dynamics, dysfunctional relationships, or abuse—among many
other possibilities. If one player signs up for a “love plot” imagining
teenage flirtation and is paired with another who is imagining
dysfunctional angst, they may have trouble finding their way to mutually
satisfactory play.

### Implementing the Three Principles During Writing, Casting, Pre-Game Planning, and Play

The creation of a LARP consists of four phases: writing, casting,
pre-game negotiation and planning, and play/run-time (not all LARPs
include all four phases). In the writing and casting stages of the
process, GMs play a larger role than players and therefore, have more
opportunities to encourage (or hinder) relationship play. In the
pre-game negotiation and play phases, the balance of responsibility
shifts to the players, but GMs still play a support role. During each
phase, GMs can facilitate the matching of players’ expectations about
the amount and type of interactions a given relationship plot will
involve, and support mutually satisfactory relationship play.

### Writing

In the written materials, GMs use character motivations and plot
structure to communicate expectations for what sort of play the players
should engage in. Furthermore, in a game where secrets are important and
out-of-game communication among players is minimal, the written
materials are the players’ main source of information about what kind of
interactions other players might be expecting. In the absence of an
explicit agreement among players about how to play a relationship plot,
which could serve as the basis for trusting each other, the written
materials serve as a proxy. In this style of game, players (implicitly)
agree to trust each other to reach a similar understanding of the plot,
based on reading the sheets, and to play in ways congruent with that
vision. The more clearly GMs communicate expectations, the more likely
players will be to enter game with similar expectations.

Furthermore, the writing and plot structure can either facilitate or
impede satisfying relationship play. It is possible for players to
compensate for misaligned expectations and other impediments, but it is
best if GMs write in ways that support players and make it easier for
them to play their relationship plots fully and satisfyingly.

#### *Principle 1: Write characters who are motivated (or forced) to interact with each other.*

Characters in a relationship should have something they want from each
other, a conflict to resolve, or a problem they need to solve together.
In each case, there should be obstacles or complications that make it
non-trivial for the characters to reach a resolution. This gives
characters a reason to interact *more than once* over the course of the
game. Conflicts can take many forms. For example, Jamie and Chris are
lovers, but Chris is married and has a political career that can’t
withstand scandal. Jamie wants Chris to leave their family and go public
with the relationship, Chris wants Jaime to keep the relationship
secret, and both want to maintain the relationship. The two characters
have opposing goals, each needs to get the other to do something, and
each character has an internal conflict between “(don’t) publicize the
relationship” and “keep the other person from leaving me.”

External conflict can also drive relationship play. For example, when
Romeo and Juliet are in love but forbidden by their parents to be
together. In this case, the parents had better be written with strong
motivation to actively keep their children apart. And the players of the
parents need to understand that part of their role is to provide
conflict for their children’s relationship plot, and be willing to play
accordingly.

As an alternative to giving characters explicit motivation to interact,
external circumstances can force them to do so. For example, they’re on
the same working team together (police partners, spaceship crew,
political delegation, etc.), or they are corporation heads who have to
negotiate with each other, or it’s a 6-person game where all the
characters are trapped together in an airlock or at a dinner table.
However, proximity only creates opportunities for interaction and
without conflict or goals, it can be difficult for players to turn
casual interactions into dramatic or meaningful ones.

GMs should not write relationships in which one or both characters are
explicitly motivated to *avoid* interacting with each other, because
players’ default instinct will be to do just that. It is possible to
write a relationship plot in which the characters are trying to avoid
each other but, nevertheless, end up interacting meaningfully. However,
this either requires that external circumstances force the characters to
interact (for example, a third character is motivated to get them
talking, or their jobs require them to work alone together, or all the
characters are due to be dosed with a potion that causes them to blurt
out their secrets), or it requires the players to actively *steer* their
characters into interactions that will further the narrative, despite
the characters’ wishes. Steering to this degree is an advanced skill
that not all players have, nor is it equally appropriate in all games.

Although GMs should not rely on player steering as a substitute for
thoughtful game design, those who wish to encourage steering can do so
by explicitly writing about steering strategies in the general briefing
materials for the game. It is also possible to incorporate opportunities
for steering into a game’s structure. For example, in *Just A Little
Lovin’* (Grasmo & Edland, 2018), one in-game event is the serving of the
celebratory “green drink,” which is described in the rules as an
opportunity for players to decide to either take their character in a
new direction, or double down on their current direction. Primed to
think about steering, players used the “green drink” as an in-game
justification for their characters to do things like initiate difficult
and dramatic conversations about the wrongs they’d done each other.

In lightly-plotted games with an emphasis on player-created content, GMs
can encourage relationship play by providing all characters with some
pre-written relationships. For example, in *Marked: A School for Heroes*
(Piancastelli & Walmsley, 2018), each character belongs to an origin
group and a training team, and also has one or two pre-defined
relationships, such as romantic attractions, friendships, or relatives.
The relationships between characters in the origin groups are fleshed
out as part of the backstory, and often include specific reasons for
characters to interact, such as unfinished business from the past or a
desire to ‘get the band back together.’ Training teams are guaranteed to
spend a lot of time playing together due to the game’s structure;
relationships among these characters are left for players to develop
through some combination of pre-game negotiation and in-game emergent
play. Other individual relationships are fleshed out only slightly in
the written materials, and players are instructed to negotiate details
with each other pre-game. This structure ensures that whether or not
they are able to engage in pre-game planning and content generation, all
players have a set of people with whom they are guaranteed to interact
regularly, plus a good number of others with whom they have potentially
dramatic relationships, including some specific reasons to interact with
relationship partners.

GMs of all styles of games can explicitly instruct and/or remind players
to interact with their relationship partners. Telling players what to do
in game is an option to be used with care, as players may feel that this
restricts their agency and opportunities for problem-solving. However, I
think explicit communication about expectations is a strategy worth
experimenting with in our LARP-writing communities. When is it helpful
to give players explicit instructions about how their characters should
interact? When is it simply annoying and intrusive?

#### *Principle 2: Write relationships in which all the characters* care equally strongly *about the relationship, and* have similar amounts of time available *to devote to the relationship.*

A common pitfall of relationship plots is when characters (and,
therefore, players) do not care equally about the relationship. For
example, Pat is madly in love with Sam, who has romance plots with three
characters: their current spouse, with whom they have a strong
friendship, the long-lost love of their life who has just come to town,
and Pat, with whom Sam has been casually flirting. For another example,
Robin’s main focus in game is controlling the life of their child,
Taylor, but Taylor resents the interference and does not need support or
permission from Robin in order to get things done. In these examples,
unless the players deliberately prioritize the relationships more than
their character sheets suggest, Sam and Taylor are unlikely to engage
much with Pat and Robin, leaving Pat and Robin’s players feeling
frustrated and neglected.

It is good for a character to have multiple important relationships, as
long as these relationships do not directly **compete** with each other
for emotional primacy, attention, and interaction time. The most common
example of such conflict is when characters have multiple romance plots.
Polyamory and love triangles where a character has to choose between two
suitors are perfectly viable plot structures if all the participants
know what to expect. However, beyond two or three romance plots, it
becomes difficult for a player to share satisfying play with all their
partners—unless the aim is simply flirting or sleeping around with
little depth to the relationships. In addition, when characters have
multiple romantic relationships, mismatch of priorities is likely: if
Sam and Pat each have three romance plots, but Pat cares most about Sam
while Sam prefers their other suitors to Pat, Pat’s player may still end
up disappointed, despite having other partners to play with.

Another common pitfall is to give the characters unequal amounts of time
and opportunity to engage with each other. For example, Frey and Luz are
long-lost lovers. Frey is a political leader and will have to spend a
lot of time in the political committee plot, which meets in a closed
room. Luz is not a politician, and their other plots are not very
time-consuming. In this case, although both characters *want* to
interact, Frey is unlikely to be free to do so as much as they would
like, and Luz will probably spend a lot of time waiting. One way to
mitigate this problem would be to give Luz a different time-consuming
plot to focus on; probably the relationship plot will be underplayed,
but there will be less risk of hurt feelings. A better solution would be
to put both Frey and Luz in the same political plot; the characters are
forced to spend time together in public, though opportunities for
private interactions may still be few. This situation can also generate
a conflict for the romance plot (we’re in love, but must pursue opposing
political agendas and keep our feelings secret from our teammates).
Better still would be to structure the political plot so that it doesn’t
consume all the characters’ available time, for example, by mandating
specific times for committee meetings and breaks.

It is not impossible for characters with demands on their time to
successfully be involved in relationship plots, but GMs should be aware
of the risks and take extra care to mitigate them. GMs should think
twice before giving relationship plots to characters such as bodyguards
(who may be constrained to stick with their employers), journalists (if
they are producing an in-game newspaper), politicians, team leaders, and
characters likely to spend a lot of time on mechanics or
out-of-game-space quests.

#### *Principle 3: Know what kind of play the relationship is likely to involve, and communicate that in the written materials, so that players know what to expect.*

GMs use various methods to let players know what sort of play is
intended, ranging from using the narrative of the character sheet to
implicitly convey information, to explicit descriptions of character
traits, goals or (in scene-based games) scenes to play out. In some
games, character sheets explicitly describe the dynamic between two
characters, although it is more common for a sheet to describe one
character’s feelings or behavior towards others and leave the dynamics
to be inferred. One powerful strategy I have not often seen used is to
explicitly tell players “these are the characters whose relationship
with you should be a primary source of play for you and for them; make
sure you interact with them regularly.”

### Casting

GMs can support relationship play by making relationship plots a
priority in their casting decisions, attending to them as much as to
other aspects of game.

The first step is to obtain relevant information that will help them
make these decisions. It is common practice in many LARPing communities
for GMs to gather information about players’ play preferences via a
casting questionnaire. These often include questions about players’
preferences concerning romance and/or other types of relationship plot.
Some also ask whether there are specific players a player wishes to play
with or avoid, although this sort of question is of limited utility
where players do not usually know in advance who will be playing the
game, and may not know many of the other players. Questionnaire space
permitting, GMs can also ask players what type of relationship play they
are interested in and how much priority they will give to relationships.
GMs can ask about play style and skills, what players are good at and
where they need support to get to the kind of play they desire. Specific
questions like these will help players understand the range of
possibilities and articulate their own preferences.

GMs can follow up individually with self-identified novices, as well as
people who don’t give useful information on their casting
questionnaires. One-on-one conversations about these players’ needs and
interests can be an opportunity for the GM to help players understand
what game may be like and what the options mean, and to give them an
opportunity to ask questions. More generally, GMs can contact individual
players with targeted requests for additional information, avoiding
spoilers for low-transparency games. For example, a GM could ask, “I am
considering casting you as a character whose angsty families are a
central plot, so you’d need to spend a lot of your time and energy on
that. Does that sound like fun?”

With relevant information about players’ skills and preferences, GMs can
use the three design principles to guide their casting decisions.

#### *Principle 1: Cast relationships with a combination of players who actually want to interact with their relationship partners and who, among them, are likely to be able to make the interactions happen.*

Fitting players to characters in a game is a complex optimization puzzle
for which, usually, no perfect solution exists. GMs often end up having
to give a player a character that fits them well in some respects, but
includes some aspects the player is indifferent about or actively
doesn’t want.

When GMs consider relationship plots to be of secondary importance, they
may compromise by casting a player in a relationship they don’t want
because they’re a good fit for a character in other ways. In this
situation, the player is likely to de-prioritize the relationship or
play it poorly. This will negatively impact the experience of their
relationship partners, especially if they requested this type of plot
and were looking forward to it. Therefore, when making casting
decisions, GMs should consider the effects on all the players
potentially involved in a relationship.

Even when players have compatible expectations, they can run into
difficulties creating the kind of relationship play they want to have.
If GMs have the relevant information, they can cast players with
compatible or complementary relationship play skills. For example, one
player’s questionnaire may say that they really want to play a romance
plot but don’t have much experience, or are shy about taking the
initiative, or don’t know any of the other players. The GMs can support
this player by casting them opposite a player who has a lot of
experience with relationship plots, knows how to take the initiative, or
is good at encouraging novice players. As an additional step, the GMs
could explicitly tell the experienced partner, “We’ve paired you with
someone who’s new to love plots but really wants to give it a try, so
you may need to take more initiative than usual.”

GMs can also attend to players’ relationship play strengths and
weaknesses when matching players to characters. For example, for a
relationship where Taylor is supposed to be constantly flirting, Quinn
is jealous, and they are always fighting about it, the desired dynamic
is more likely to come out in play if Taylor’s player is good at
proactive flirting and Quinn’s character is good at initiating
confrontations. And make sure to cast two characters who are each
secretly pining and waiting for the other to make the first move, with
players who are good at steering reluctant characters into dramatic
interactions.

#### *Principles 2 and 3: Partner players in relationships who will prioritize the relationship similarly and enjoy similar kinds of play.*

To encourage player trust and minimize the chance of frustration, GMs
should find out **how much priority** players are likely to place on the
relationship, in terms of both **time devoted** to the plot and
**emotional investment** in the plot, and cast players of similar levels
together.

It is always disappointing when one player puts time, energy, and
emotional investment into a plot, only to have it fizzle because the
other players involved didn’t make it a priority. The risk of hurt
feelings is particularly high for relationship plots, because engaging
with them means making oneself emotionally vulnerable, which makes it
particularly difficult to completely separate character feelings from
player feelings. When someone decides not to bother playing a
relationship plot with you, it’s easy to feel like it’s a personal
rejection, even if you know intellectually that it isn’t.

On the other hand, when all the players in a relationship plot are
highly invested in a relationship plot, and they know it, trust can be
established that allows for intense, courageous, dramatic emotional
play. Relationship play is at its best when players trust that their
partners want to spend time playing with them, are emotionally invested
in the relationship plot, are willing to make themselves vulnerable, and
are on the same wavelength about what kind of play is fun.

### Pre-game Planning/Negotiation

Some high-transparency games include a pre-game planning phase, in which
a lot of the content-generation happens through player-to-player
negotiation and collaboration. Traditionally, this phase does not exist,
or is used only minimally, in low-transparency games. However, I think
there are ways we could use it a little more while still being sensitive
to potential spoilers.

In this planning phase, the GM hands over most of the responsibility for
content creation to the players. Thus, the forms of support GMs can
offer players are largely in realm of structuring the social environment
to help players find compatible partners for relationship play,
facilitate productive player collaboration and foster equitable access
to this content-creation process. GMs can also use their big-picture
knowledge of the game’s content and structure, along with key design
principles, to help players set up the kind of relationship play they
want and think about how to support other players’ play.

Whatever the type of game, GMs should set clearly communicate with
players during publicity and recruitment what the expectations are for
pre-game content creation. It is also helpful to reiterate expectations
to players after they are cast, so that they know how to make the most
of the pre-game planning phrase. This is particularly important as
players from high-negotiation and low-negotiation traditions mingle,
bringing their differing assumptions and expectations into game. GMs
should be honest with themselves and explicit with the players about
what pre-planning and content-generation responsibilities will fall to
the players, and what the logistical requirements are to fulfill these
responsibilities. Will all the pre-planning among players take place
on-site in pre-game workshops? Will players be expected to contact each
other in the days, weeks, or months before game to plan content? If so,
will they be expected to do so primarily over Facebook, email, or some
other medium? How much time should they expect to devote to pre-game
content planning? What supports will GMs provide to players who have
difficulty with the logistical or social aspects of content planning?
For games with an emphasis on player-generated content and active social
media pre-planning communities, GMs do players a disservice when they
reassure them that participation in these communities is optional and
everyone will have a chance to participate in the necessary planning
during the on-site workshops. Conversely, if players are expected to
restrict their pre-planning to the structured on-site workshops, they
need to know that their content-generation options will be limited.

In the pre-game planning phase itself, GMs should try to identify
individual players’ needs and offer extra support to those who need it.
Players experienced at player-content-driven games may need little or no
support, but most will benefit from some support structures, while some
may need additional help to plan for satisfying relationship play. GMs
can use pre-game surveys or other information-gathering methods to
establish what sort of support players need, and then proactively offer
support to individuals based on this self-report. For example, some
players may need help connecting with like-minded potential partners,
because they are strangers to the community, or are shy about initiating
online negotiations. Others may need help figuring out how to create a
relationship that will lead to satisfying play, once they have a
partner. Others may not be able to participate in the group planning
forums, either because they don’t have access to the right social media
platforms or because they don’t have the time to engage in extensive
pre-game planning. Different needs require different forms of support,
so it is a good idea to use multiple strategies, in order to help as
many players as possible.

Some support strategies will require extra work from GMs. Indeed, many
games that emphasize content creation by players have “character
coaches” on staff, whose job is to assist individual players with
character planning. However large the staff, its capacity is always
finite. Therefore, while it is important to offer players support, it is
also important for both players and staff to understand that there are
limits to that support. One way GMs can communicate this idea is to
decide beforehand what kinds of support for pre-game planning they will
be able to offer, and present this as a bullet list to players, asking
them to indicate which forms of support they need and how strongly.

There are many ways for GMs to actively support player negotiations
about pre-written character relationships. They can encourage players to
contact those with whom they have pre-written character relationships,
by explicitly instructing them to do so as part of their pre-game
preparation. GMs can give written and verbal guidelines about norms and
strategies for pre-planning (for example, “ask players about their
feelings on spoilers before you start a discussion” or “talk about how
you can give your characters reasons to seek each other out in-game”).
They can facilitate planning conversations by giving partnered players
each other’s email addresses or other contact information (though they
should obtain players’ permission to do so). They can help players who
are having trouble reaching each other. They can give partners written
prompts they can use as starting points, or advise individual players
who are unsure how to proceed. GMs can also help players negotiate about
the level of transparency to use during pre-planning, so that players
don’t accidentally give unwelcome spoilers to those who prefer to learn
character secrets during play.

It is also important to support player creation of new character
relationships, and to reduce inequities in access to play opportunities
that can result from free-form planning. For games with pre-game
planning phases, GMs often set up some online social structure that
players can use to contact each other, typically one or more Facebook
groups. Often pre-written teams (school houses, political factions,
spaceship crews, etc.) will have their own groups. However, in my
experience, these online forums tend to leave it as the responsibility
of each individual player to initiate or find connections for
themselves. Furthermore, not all players have equal access to any given
social media platform, and some lack either the time or the social
ability to keep up with a high-bandwidth, free-for-all planning
community. Thus, in practice, these online planning structures are
useful for only part of the player population, and if they are the only
method of pre-game planning used, can lead to disparities in how well
individual players are integrated into game.

Some games have a dedicated group for players looking to form
relationships, where players can post introductions to their characters
and state what they are looking for in relationships with other
characters. This is a good addition to a game’s pre-planning support
structures, especially if the group’s existence is well-publicized,
along with advice for how to successfully participate in it. To take
this idea a step further, GMs (or character coaches) could survey
players after they have received their characters, to identify those
interested in forming extra relationships, and those who want help in
doing so. They could then match up these players in pairs or small
groups according to character compatibility and player needs and
interests. Or GMs could introduce these players to each other as a group
and scaffold their efforts to form partnerships, for example, by sending
out a list of character descriptions rather than leaving it to the
players to make individual posts.

For players who need help with plot generation rather than with
networking, GMs could offer a list of tips or prompts (for example,
“give your characters a problem to solve together” or “two characters
are attracted to each other but one has trust issues and the other has a
secret they are afraid to reveal”). Or a GM/character coach could sit in
on the players’ planning conversations to offer suggestions if they get
stuck (for example, “that sounds like a cool relationship dynamic, but
it might be easier to find reasons to interact if there’s something each
character wants from the other one”). GMs can use the key design
principles to guide these discussions with players, especially those who
do not have much game design experience to draw on and may not
understand how to set up a relationship plot that will encourage
interesting character interactions (rather than simply sounding good on
paper).

In games with a heavy player-content-generation focus, pre-game
workshops can be used to help players form and plan character
relationships. Devoting ample workshop time to this purpose is
particularly important for the support of players who do not have time
to devote to planning before they arrive on site, or who are better able
to negotiate in person than online. If events are running behind
schedule, these workshops may end up taking second place to can’t-skip
workshop topics such as safety. However, if this happens, GMs need to be
aware of the impact it will have on play, and consider whether there is
anything they can do to compensate. GMs can also make sure to manage
time within workshops so that every group or relationship pair gets
similar amounts of time (a common failure mode is that the people who go
first take too long, at the expense of the people who go last).Many
games devote workshop time to planning with “core groups” such as
primary social group, school house or training team. However, it is also
important to set aside dedicated time for players to connect with their
personal-relationship partners who do not belong to their “core group.”

As in online pre-planning, GMs could offer an optional “find new
relationships” workshop. This could include structures to help players
match up, for example, a ‘speed dating’ format, sorting players
according to the type of play they’re interested in, prompt cards giving
relationship ideas that players can select and then pair up with whoever
has the matching card, or introductions by GMs based on their knowledge
of characters and of the players’ needs.

Workshops have their limitations, and do not work equally well for all
players. GMs should be prepared to offer extra support to players who
struggle. For example, GMs can help players find compatible relationship
partners, rather than leaving players to find each other by random
combination in the moment. GMs can suggest ideas for players who have
trouble making up details about relationships on the spot. They can
prompt players to discuss the kind of play they want to have together
and to give themselves reasons to interact.

Finally, GMs can set up a system for checking in with players after the
workshops and before game, to identify those who are feeling isolated or
unsatisfied with the outcome of their relationship workshops. It is
probably best to delegate this responsibility to a particular staff
member, rather than have the primary GMs do it during the bustle of
last-minute preparation. At this point in time, there may be little that
can be done to mitigate players’ difficulties, but staff can at least
note the problem and plan to keep an eye on those players during game,
and perhaps offer advice for players as they start game.

Online pre-planning and pre-game workshops also serve to generally
foster trust and fellowship among players before game starts. Players
have opportunities to meet each other as individuals and begin to form a
sense of community. I suspect that this helps them go into game with a
higher level of trust and goodwill towards each other than if their
first contact was at the beginning of game. In games that do not include
a pre-planning component, this sense of community and player trust comes
largely from existing relationships between individual players, from
players’ membership in the organization running the game, and, for games
that run at cons, the community feeling generated by the larger event.

Trust and goodwill are a necessary foundation for satisfying
relationship play. It is possible to have wonderful relationship play
with a total stranger; indeed, most of my own best in-game relationship
experiences have been with strangers (including meeting my future
spouse). However, it can also be easier to take emotional risks and
engage deeply in relationship play with a player one knows, even if only
to the extent of “I’ve played with you before and it didn’t suck.”

Pre-game workshops are not appropriate for all games. However, perhaps
the workshop tradition could inspire our LARP communities to explore
related pre-game strategies for explicitly helping players get to know
each other and feel part of a community. This need not involve
discussion of in-game information, if the game is a low-transparency
one. It could be valuable to do something as simple as setting aside an
extra half hour before game for a structured gathering in which players
introduce themselves by real-life name might help newcomers feel part of
the group and foster a feeling that “we’re all in this together.”

### Play

GMs’ ability to assist relationship play during run-time is limited,
because they need to leave play to the players as much as possible, and
because many problems cannot be fixed. There is little GMs can do to
help if players are not interested in the relationship plot, have
incompatible priorities or play styles, or have poor chemistry with each
other. However, GMs may be able to assist players who are unsure what
sort of play their partners are expecting or how to steer their
characters towards satisfying interactions. For example, they can nudge
relationship partners to interact with each other, suggest ways to
initiate more dramatic or meaningful interactions, or help a player
whose relationships have fizzled find other characters to engage with.

During run-time, GMs can look out for players who are isolated or having
trouble with relationship play. For large games, it is a good idea to
have staff member(s) whose specific responsibility it is to support
players who are struggling. However, GMs should use caution about
breaking the flow of play to ask players if they need help; many players
find this jarring, especially in the traditional type of
low-transparency where the norm is for the flow to be interrupted as
little as possible, with meta-talk kept to a minimum. In games that have
them, NPCs can be used as a somewhat less jarring way to deliver this
sort of support to players; for example, the NPC can give in-character
advice or prompts to serve as an excuse for a player-character to take
action. If the game has built-in structures that support steering, such
as the “green drink,” GMs can help players use these opportunities to
foster the interactions they want their characters to have.

In some high-transparency games, it is the norm for players to negotiate
about play during run-time; this norm makes it less disruptive for
players to seek GM aid, as well. As in the pre-game planning phase, GMs
can actively help players negotiate their way to more satisfying
relationship play. The longer a game is, the more time is available for
negotiation and course-correction, as well as for relationships to
evolve through emergent play. Some multi-day, high-negotiation games
even offer explicit mid-game planning times. For example, *Just A Little
Lovin’* (Grasmo & Edland, 2018) is structured in three acts, with
substantial between-acts breaks in which players have the opportunity to
negotiate with each other about the sort of play they’re looking for in
the upcoming act. In particular, players can decide that their character
has moved on from their core social group and joined a new one. It is
also an opportunity to create new plot arcs if old ones have been
resolved, to course-correct if players are not having fun, and to
negotiate with relationship partners. It is somewhat more difficult for
players to find new relationship partners in this context, however,
because the activities are structured by pre-existing groups (indeed, it
can be hard to find time to negotiate with existing relationship
partners who belong to different groups). Additionally, dedicated
negotiation time does not, by itself, make it easy for players to have
difficult conversations, or to identify and negotiate with others who
might be interested in forming new character relationships.

As well as making themselves available to players who seek help during
run-time planning sessions, GMs can sit in on the players’ discussions,
identifying and supporting those who need help negotiating their way to
more satisfying relationship play. They can facilitate negotiations when
players are upset, uncomfortable, or shy, or offer suggestions if
players cannot come up with a mutually agreeable compromise. If a player
needs new relationship partners, GMs can identify players who are likely
to be interested in taking on the new relationship and willing and able
to put in the extra work to make it flourish on the fly.

In some high-transparency games that rely heavily on player generation
of content, one strategy GMs use to help players who are not having a
good time is to create new plots or relationships in mid-game, or even
to let players take on a whole new character. In my own experience, I
find this strategy is of limited utility when the player’s problem is
specifically a lack of meaningful relationship play. There are two
inherent difficulties. First, in order to provide the player with new
relationships, GMs must find other players interested in engaging in
extra relationship play. Second, a relationship formed part-way through
game will lack the emotional foundation of a pre-written or pre-planned
relationship, and the emotional detail that builds up through emergent
play. The players have to start from scratch, and with little context,
it may be difficult to integrate the new relationship into the
characters’ existing emotional arcs. It can be easier when the
characters forming a ‘new’ relationship have already interacted in-game,
so that players can build on that foundation. For example, players could
decide that their characters’ previous venting-about-their-exes
conversation sparked both trust and romantic attraction, which the
characters can now follow up on as the basis for their newly-created
romance plot. However, it will not always be possible for GMs to find a
volunteer who has already had interesting in-character interactions with
the player they are trying to help.

When GMs are able to facilitate negotiation for the improvement of an
existing relationship plot or the creation of a new one, they can use
the three key design principles as a guide, making sure to find the
characters reasons to interact, something they need from each other,
something they need to do together, or a problem to resolve. In
particular, if one player wants a new relationship and another has
volunteered to help, it is important to give the second player’s
character a strong reason to interact with the first. For example,
rather than telling players “You got a message from your grandfather
saying that this stranger turns out to be a long-lost cousin of your
noble house,” have the grandfather’s message include an imperative to
accomplish something *during game*: the new-found cousins must do the
secret initiation ritual together, or find a spouse for the newcomer, or
negotiate about how to split up the family business. If the players have
agreed to start a romance plot between two characters who were
previously unconnected, help them to come up with specific things they
want from each other and obstacles to getting those things. For example,
Jeff wants Max to introduce him to gay sex but is afraid of getting too
emotionally attached, Max is looking for a long-term boyfriend and wants
to find out if Jeff can be that for him, but without scaring Jeff off.

GMs can use these same strategies in long games that do not have
explicit breaks for negotiation and planning, but it is logistically
harder. It is even harder to help players course-correct in short games;
GMs may find there is little they can do beyond helping players find
ways other than relationship play to engage with game.

## Conclusion

GMs can facilitate satisfying relationship play by attending to the
three key design principles as they write relationship plots, cast
players, and support players’ negotiation, planning and play with each
other:

1. Players (and characters) in a relationship must all be **motivated to interact with each other**
2. The relationship should be about the **same level of priority** for all the players (and characters) involved.
3. The players should have similar desires and expectations for the **type of play** they will engage in together

These principles will help GMs minimize the chance of misalignment
between players’ expectations, those of their relationship partners, and
the constraints and affordances of the parts in which they are cast.

Of course, there is only so much GMs can do to influence players’
experience, particularly once play starts. The players themselves share
the responsibility for creating satisfying relationship play for
themselves and each other. I hope to follow the present article with a
sequel focused on how players can use these three design principles to
guide and enhance relationship play.

### References

Piancastelli, Joanna, Walmsley, Graham. *Marked: A School For Heroes*.
2018. Live action role play game.

Grasmo, Hanne, Edland, Tor Kjetil. *Just a Little Lovin’*. 2011. Live
action role play game.
