---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: "Our Earlier Works Are Problematic"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Our Earlier Works Are Problematic</h2>
  </div>
  by Nat Budin & Phoebe Roberts
</header>

### Content notes

This article discusses problematic depictions of and ideas about autism.
It also contains a spoiler-filled plot summary of the larp *Resonance*,
including discussions of an apocalypse and mind-altering biotechnology.

### Introduction

All artists grow and change over time, and as they grow, they sometimes
come to the realization that they are no longer happy with their earlier
works. As larp creators, we are no exception. When we discover that one
of our works is problematic, what should we do? There isn’t an obvious
answer in general, and the medium of larp makes the question even
murkier.

In this article, we’ll introduce a case study in how a problematic larp
came into existence, how we came to realize its problems, and the
challenges we ran into while tackling those problems. We’ll also discuss
the broader implications and lessons that can be gleaned from these
experiences.

The larp we’ll be looking at is Alleged Entertainment’s *Resonance*, a
scene-based[^1] litform[^2] game in which all of the characters begin
with amnesia. Due to the nature of the analysis we’ll be doing,
revealing some secret information written into the larp is unavoidable,
so **if you don’t want spoilers for *Resonance*, please stop reading
now**.

*Resonance* was written by Susan Weiner, Vito D’Agosta, and the authors
of this article, with additional conceptual development by Jesse Cox and
Danielle Reese. Since we only comprise some of the writing team for this
larp, we cannot speak as representatives of the team as a whole. The
opinions in this article are purely those of Nat Budin and Phoebe
Roberts.

### Overview of *Resonance*

*Resonance* takes place in an unspecified near-future time in the United
States of America. In this future, the US Department of Defense, in
collaboration with militaries from other nations, has developed a
mind-altering virus called “Resonance,” which was accidentally released
into the world and has wreaked havoc. Much of the population has been
rendered unable to function; power grids have shut down. In short, the
virus has caused an apocalypse.

None of this background is known to the characters as the game begins.
They wake up, remembering nothing—not even their own identities—in an
underground government hospital with no way to leave. The characters
slowly regain their memories by experiencing group flashbacks. These are
represented by removing the players from the main space in three groups
of five players each, and giving them short character sheets for the
flashback scene they are to experience. The memories each character is
given, as described in the short character sheets and played out in the
flashback scene, may belong to someone else. The reason for this, and
for the shared memories, is that the Resonance virus is causing the
characters’ minds to be linked telepathically.

In each of the flashback scenes, each character has a choice to make
between two values (for example, Vigilant vs. Compassionate). When the
character has made that choice, the player circles the appropriate value
on the character sheet for the scene and hands it back to a game master
(GM). Once the players have experienced three flashbacks, the GM team
uses their answers to assign each player a character that matches their
choices. There are a total of 45 pre-written characters in *Resonance*,
so in any given run, a third of them will be used.

The characters are all in some way connected to the project that
produced and released the Resonance virus. They must spend the rest of
the game coming to terms with the fact that they caused the apocalypse,
while experiencing further flashbacks leading up to a scene taking place
the moment they entered the underground hospital. In that scene, the
code to activate the elevator leading out of the hospital room is
revealed. Once they take the elevator up, they arrive in another
underground chamber with a computer in it. The computer is programmed to
let them leave the facility, but only after they establish a line of
succession (the president may or may not be one of the 15 characters
present) and a plan for the future.

### *Resonance*’s treatment of autism

The original version of *Resonance* makes use of autism as a plot
device, in ways that are deeply problematic. In that version of the
larp, the virus was developed as a “cure” for autism, and it worked by
stimulating mirror neurons in order to allow a form of direct
brain-to-brain communication.

Mirror neurons are a type of neuron in the frontal cortex. Not long
after the discovery of mirror neurons, early studies linked them to the
function of imitating behavior. In 2001, a group of research
psychologists from Scotland and Australia proposed that “some
dysfunction in the \[mirror neuron\] system might be implicated in the
generation of the constellation of clinical features which constitute
the autistic syndrome” (Williams et al. 2–15). By the time *Resonance*
was written, several popular science publications had promulgated this
theory. Also by this time, however, multiple scientists, such as
Dinstein in 2008 and Fan in 2010, had raised doubts about the theory. In
2013, the idea had been thoroughly debunked, as shown by Hamilton’s
comprehensive meta-analysis (Hamilton).

Aside from the issue of mirror neurons, the original *Resonance*’s
conception of autism is further flawed. The Resonance virus is designed
to create a telepathic link between the minds of its carriers. Its
creators mean this to function as a counter to autism, in that it
creates a capacity for empathy where none existed. While this conception
of autism is widespread, research, as well as the lived experiences of
autistic people, show it to be incorrect. Some autistic people do have
difficulty recognizing emotions in others, but this is far from
universal and is also not the same as a lack of empathy (Brewer and
Murphy).

Many in the autistic community feel that, when speaking about autism,
it’s important to include autistic people in that creation. The Autistic
Self Advocacy Network, one of the world’s most prominent autism
nonprofits, has adopted “nothing about us without us” as its slogan.
None of the writers of *Resonance* are autistic, and we did not consult
with any autistic people as part of the process of creating the larp.
Furthermore, none of the playable characters in the larp are autistic.
Autistic people are used purely as plot devices and background props in
the original version of the game.

### History of *Resonance*

*Resonance* was created by most of the team that had, at the time, just
finished writing *The Last Seder*, which had itself been an experiment,
using the scene-based structure to craft a tightly-plotted narrative
with built-in twists and pacing. *The Last Seder* had been a very
popular larp that accomplished what it set out to do, but some players
complained of not having any influence over the storyline. *Resonance*
was conceived, in large part, as an attempt to respond to this criticism
by using some of the same mechanics in a way that afforded players more
and more directorial power as the game progressed.

When it originally ran in 2011, *Resonance* was well-received. Several
players in early runs told us it was their favorite larp. In particular,
players enjoyed the game’s unusual structure and new take on the
well-worn amnesia trope.

In the third run of the game, we conducted an informal debrief on the
spur of the moment, because players were eager to ask questions about
how the mechanics worked and share their experiences. During this
session, one player brought up the subject of neurodiversity, citing
*Resonance* as a positive example of a neurodiversity narrative. This
player took away the message that society must treat neurodivergent
people better. This reading of the larp did not sit well with all of the
writers; in particular, Phoebe did not recall this message having been
considered during the creation process. However, we didn’t discuss this
discomfort at the time.

For the fourth run of *Resonance* in 2014, Phoebe was on her own. The
run was at Brandeis University’s *Festival of the LARPs*, which none of
the other writers were attending that year, and so Phoebe asked some
trusted collaborators from outside the writing team to help with GM
duties. At that *Festival*, Jules Pilowsky, one of the players in the
game, became quite uncomfortable with the treatment of autism in the
larp, and after the run, gave Phoebe some specific feedback about it.
Pilowsky is not herself autistic, but has personal experience of autism
via a close family member. She pointed out the game’s characterization
of autism as a deficiency in empathy.

Phoebe, who had herself been feeling uneasy about the larp but had not
yet been able to pin down why, found Pilowsky’s comment insightful and
illuminating. However, she wasn’t sure what to do with the feedback.
This conception of autism was baked deeply into the game’s story—the
only way the Resonance virus can operate as a cure for autism is if
autism is a deficiency in empathy. Eventually, she spoke with Nat about
her concerns, but he too was unsure of how to correct the issues. Both
authors agreed with Pilowsky, but neither had any good idea how to
proceed.

*Resonance* didn’t run again until late 2015, when Nat and Phoebe
produced the game at a private home in the suburbs of Boston. During
that run, two players noticed the treatment of autism, which upset them
enough that they needed to leave the game temporarily and return during
a later scene. After the larp, the players expressed their anger at the
authors’ thoughtless inclusion of this content. Phoebe, Nat, and the
players of this run all discussed ways to change the game to be less
problematic, and the two players suggested that the easiest solution
might be to replace autism in the game with some fictional disorder.

We brought this feedback to the rest of the writing team, and some
discussion ensued over email. The potential problematic reading of the
content was acknowledged by all, but because of the earlier feedback,
particularly at the third run, some of the team did not want to change
the game. There was a feeling that it was possible to make the game read
more clearly as a positive neurodiversity narrative, but that idea was
not universally agreed upon amongst the writers. Attempting to carve a
compromise path, Phoebe proposed to do some rewrites to some of the main
characters to help make it clearer that many of the views about autism
expressed in the game were those of the characters, not the authors. The
other authors agreed it would be a good idea.

After completing these tweaks, however, Phoebe felt that the result was
not successful, and that the distinction between the characters’ views
and the authors’ views did not come across. Therefore, the writers
decided to proceed with the 2015 players’ suggestion of replacing autism
with a fictional disorder. One of the writers felt that it was important
to make sure players knew the game was actually “about autism,” and
planned to mention it during game debriefings; the other authors felt
the opposite way.

Nat searched through the game’s text for mentions of the words “autism,”
“autistic,” “spectrum,” and other related terms, and replaced them with
“Braiden’s Syndrome.” In addition, he changed some of the text that
mentioned some of the markers of autism to different characteristics not
tied to autism. There has only been, to our knowledge, one run of this
version of *Resonance*, in 2016 at Nat’s house in the Seattle suburbs.
That run seemed to be successful, and the changes did not appear to
worsen the gameplay or decrease players’ enjoyment of the game. One run
is, however, not enough data to decide if the rewrite was truly a
success. Nonetheless, this is the version of *Resonance* now available
on Larp Library[^3] for public download.

### Case analysis

As may be apparent from the multiple attempts required, addressing these
issues was not an easy process. We ran into a number of barriers that
prevented us from implementing changes that really tackled the problem.

There was, as is often the case, an instinctive, emotional pushback on
the part of the creative team. It’s always difficult to confront the
notion that something you’ve lovingly created is flawed or even
damaging, when you’ve put so much work and time and emotional energy
into making it. Nobody likes reopening the book on a satisfying finished
product. Also, the reception the game received for the first several
years of its running life was overwhelmingly positive, acting as a
powerful counterpoint to any criticism encountered so much later in the
process. It’s a common feeling among artists to develop resistance to
redoing strong work you thought was finished. And the members of the
team initially did not agree on the best way to respond to the issue.
There was some initial hope that this was only the opinion of a small
minority of players and not actually a problem. One often finds with
criticism dealing with the artistic value of a work that it can be only
a matter of taste, specific to one or a few people, upon which the
artist can agree to disagree.

Further still, there was an impulse to attempt a fix involving writing
tweaks that still maintained the presence of autism in the story. At the
time, this was seen as a way to a simple fix. But in actuality, our
ultimate solution of simply switching out autism for a fictional disease
was much, much easier. Why did we miss this in our initial efforts?
Because, we felt a need to deny that the problem was large, that if the
content only needed some slight re-presenting, our mistake could not
have been that serious—that we hadn’t been so unthinkingly ableist. It
took some processing, discussion, and serious self-reflection before we
came to the conclusion that the whole concept had to be removed from the
game. And that the reason for that removal was that our insensitivity
caused us to create a harmful depiction.

Of course, there remains the question of why this even happened in the
first place.

The biggest reason was ignorance—of autism, and of the consequences our
portrayal of it might have. While none of us were completely uninformed,
we did not realize how much we didn’t understand about the condition due
to a lack of experience and some level of ableism. Also, at the time of
the game’s inception, some recent research, that has since been
discredited, suggested a relationship between autism and mirror neurons,
which shaped the conception written into the game. Insufficient further
research was conducted, which might have provided much-needed
perspective into the reality of the condition. Also, early planning
discussions of the game’s design focused mainly on the unusual structure
and how to facilitate its workings. This meant that any thought as to
the game’s message became secondary, with the unspoken implications of
that message even less thoroughly considered

### Owning mistakes

While many of our mistakes in this process are clear, something like
this can happen to any project. We were a team of educated, relatively
socially aware writers, all of whom would have professed a desire to
create art that was inclusive and did not perpetuate harm, and we still
managed to stumble into this pit. Of course artists should attempt to
educate themselves as best they can, so they avoid the failures our team
had to manage. But despite the best of intentions, and better efforts
than we were initially able to make, it’s still possible to make
mistakes.

If you’ve learned that you’ve created a problematic work that deals with
marginalization other than your own, what do you do then? When you’ve
made a misstep and put hurt out into the world that you didn’t intend,
how do you properly own your mistakes? Based on our experiences here, we
learned a few things that might be useful in a number of similar
creative situations.

The first necessary step was to listen. In the absence of our own
understanding, other people with greater perspective were the ones to
point out the problems with our portrayal. Natural protectiveness of
one’s creation can make this hard, but dismantling this resistance is
key to embracing this process. If the writer is not open to this, they
will stay limited by their own perspective and bias. The corollary to
this is to maintain an open and respectful attitude while listening.
While this can feel like a personal attack, it’s important to separate
one’s emotions from the process of evaluating one’s work. Often someone
who has come to you to tell you of a problem like this is taking on an
emotional burden themselves in speaking out— at the very least, they
risk your upset in pointing out the error. It shows respect to hear them
out in a non-defensive manner. And frankly, when your actions have
caused harm to someone else, the first feelings you should be focusing
on are not your own.

Once you’ve absorbed the information as neutrally as you can, be sure to
take time to reflect on the feedback. Not every bit of input is going to
be useful, and no one is obligated to act on every single response, but
particularly if you are feeling knee-jerk resistance to criticism, this
is crucial. It may take time for the emotional reaction to subside
enough for you to be receptive to the point. Moreover, even if you are
open to incorporating feedback, this will help you truly internalize it
into your own understanding. The greater the understanding you can come
to of how you erred, the better you will learn to avoid this same
pitfall in the future.

We also found it helpful to take time to deal with the sad feelings that
come from knowing that despite your best efforts, this work you poured
your heart and soul into is imperfect. Maybe even mourn it, because
dealing with these emotions will better enable you to move through them
in order to make an honest critical examination. But while it’s all
right if you are not able to neutrally process this criticism right
away, make sure you take this processing time privately, away from the
person who has brought you the critique, or anyone else you may have
hurt. Again, you can and should take care of your own feelings on the
callout, but you must not make those feelings the responsibility of
those who were impacted by your mistake. It is not their job to soothe
you on this, so it would be inappropriate for you to demand that
emotional labor from that quarter.

It may be that you do honestly examine the work you made on the point of
critique and genuinely decide that it is not valid. This could be
possible. But especially if the critique comes from a member of a group
to which you do not belong regarding their experience which you do not
share, we strongly encourage you to be very conservative in substituting
your own judgment on this issue. Overwhelmingly, they are greater
experts on their own experience than you are.

Finally, take responsibility. Be honest and forthright about the mistake
you made. Apologize for it without making excuses or putting the blame
on someone else. Only when you accept that you screwed up do you have a
chance on learning and moving on from it. Also, it signals to others
that you are concerned for other people’s feelings than just you own,
and you are worth engaging in good faith.

### Moving forward

Once you’ve gotten to the place of accepting that you’ve made the
mistake, what are you to do then? Fortunately, the larp medium is one of
the most open to revision. You definitely are afforded the opportunity
to fix the problems with rewrites that improve the game on artistic
counts, and improvements of a more sensitivity-oriented nature are no
different. Seeing as a different, edited version of the game is easy to
disseminate and run for any subsequent instance, it is very possible to
remove the element from the game. This can be a very satisfying course
of action for all parties, as it demonstrates an effort to eliminate
problematic depictions that would spare people hurtful experiences, as
well as maintaining the parts of the larp that you were proud of making
in the first place. But it is an equally legitimate decision to simply
decide to retire the larp. Editing and reworking can be a draining,
labor-intensive process, so there is no shame in deciding you’d like to
prevent further harm by ending exposure to it, and moving forward with
your new knowledge onto new projects.

Whichever you choose, you must also think about being accountable to
your past players about it. At the very least, it’s a good idea to reach
out to those who put themselves out there enough to point out where you
made your mistake. This is meant to be a respectful gesture,
demonstrating that you took their words into account and that it matters
to you to do better. It should not, we note, be an effort to gain their
approval or absolution in order to assuage your feelings. If your
intentions are to excuse yourself from guilt, then you are not
communicating about your efforts in good faith. Again, it is not the job
of those who hurt you to make you feel better about it.

### Doing better next time

With all this possible fallout, both external and internal to the
writer, it may seem like dealing with any potentially hurtful or
problematic themes is a minefield. Is it better, or at least safer, to
not put oneself in a position to mess up by avoiding these issues
entirely? Or should one take on the risk inherent to delving into
sensitive topics, and face the consequences if one should fail?
Interactive and performative media always involve the contributions of
people beyond just the writing team that conceives of them; larps ought
to appeal to players of a diversity of backgrounds and experience by
providing something many different folks can relate to. We don’t want
all larps to be centered on the perspectives of white straight people
all the time. However, we two authors are both white straight people,
and perhaps it’s not up to us to decide that?

Tricky as it may be, we are not advocating avoiding depicting difficult
issues entirely. But we would recommend a course of due diligence if
you’re going to make the attempt.

The very first step is to do your research. Learn as much as you can
about the topic you’ve chosen to deal with, and not just to be able to
create thoughtful, accurate representation, but also to educate yourself
on the potential pitfalls you may be facing. In service of this, it
helps to be very clear up front on the themes and ideas you want to
treat. This will help you find relevant information more easily, plus
make you more cognizant of who your art may be depicting or affecting.
New themes and notions will naturally arise during the writing process,
and that’s certainly okay. But you want to identify them as you see
them, and be deliberate about what you are including. This new direction
may necessitate new research, and you want to make sure you don’t
neglect that duty.

Researching should start with an independent effort. Take it on yourself
to do the legwork of looking up the subject matter using publicly
available resources. Read as much as you can, from as many sources close
to the issue as you can. The more personal relevance the issue has to
the person opining about it, the more likely that source is to perceive
the nuances that an outsider may miss. It’s important to start with this
type of research, as it places the labor within your own responsibility.

It may also be necessary to collaborate with a person with more personal
perspective. While all writers can include the marginalization of others
in work focused on other subjects, if you are going to create art
specifically *about* a particular marginalization, you don’t want to do
it in the absence of an artist who experiences it directly. But even if
that’s not the entire subject matter of your piece, it can still be a
good idea to get direct thoughts on your specific idea from someone with
the actual relevant experience. You can run the ideas you’re planning on
incorporating into your larp by them, and they can tell you how they
feel about your particular use in your particular case. This is great
because they can personally point out things you may not have
considered, and give you actionable feedback on where you’re strong and
where you’re going to need to revise.

This approach must be taken with care and respect, however. It is work,
both mental and emotional, to engage with someone’s art that deals with
their specific life circumstances and be in the position of having to
deliver critiques on something so close to them. You want to make this
request for someone to do this for you with respect and acknowledgement
of that fact, and if you can offer some kind of compensation in
return—whether it’s for a favor in kind or a treated meal for someone
you know well, or actual monetary recompense for someone to whom you
don’t have personal connection — you are demonstrating that you
understand the effort involved, and the value thereof. This is
definitely something you only want to ask, however, if you are
absolutely certain the person will not feel imposed upon by it, nor an
intrusion into their lives. Our goal here is to reduce the harm our art
puts into the world, so you definitely don’t want to inflict more in
your quest to ensure that.

As we’ve said, even despite these best intelligence and due diligence,
we all remain flawed human beings, so the possibility of screwing up
will always be there. Being willing to accept this truth doesn’t mean
you need to beat yourself up—it just means you need to be willing to
accept responsibility, and take steps to do better. We screwed up in
this manner with *Resonance*—our groundbreaking, powerful,
revolutionary, flawed game. While we’re not proud of ourselves for that,
we also don’t think it makes us bad people to have made this
mistake—although of course you’re free to disagree. But we are dedicated
to owning our mistakes, rectifying them as best we can, and working to
do better in the future. We feel that as artists and human beings, it’s
the best any of us can shoot for.

### Works cited

Autistic Self Advocacy Network. “Position Statements.”
[autisticadvocacy.org/about-asan/position-statements](https://autisticadvocacy.org/about-asan/position-statements). Accessed August 29,
2018.

Brewer, Rebecca, and Jennifer Murphy. “People with autism can read
emotions, feel empathy.” *Scientific American* 12 (2016).

Dinstein, Ilan, et al. “A mirror up to nature.” *Current Biology* 18.1
(2008): R13-R18.

Fan, Yang-Teng, et al. “Unbroken mirror neurons in autism spectrum
disorders.” *Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry* 51.9 (2010):
981-988.

Hamilton, Antonia F. de C. “Reflecting on the mirror neuron system in
autism: a systematic review of current theories.” *Developmental
cognitive neuroscience* 3 (2013): 91-105.

Lesya. “When Am I Writing an Identity Story?” Writing with Color, 21
July 2017,
[writingwithcolor.tumblr.com/post/163223303098/aware-that-a-story-about-z-character-should-be](https://writingwithcolor.tumblr.com/post/163223303098/aware-that-a-story-about-z-character-should-be).
Accessed September 29, 2018.

Williams, Justin HG, et al. “Imitation, mirror neurons and autism.”
*Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews* 25.4 (2001): 287-295.

[^1]: “Scene-based” refers to a larp that is split up into small scenes
    rather than playing out in one long continuous set of action.

[^2]: “Litform” refers to a one-shot larp in which the characters are
    prewritten by the game creators.

[^3]: Larp Library, at https://www.larplibrary.com, is an online
    repository of free-to-run larps available for download.
