---
layout: vol3
content_type: text/html
title: "Our Earlier Works Are Problematic"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">The Croatian Larp Scene</h2>
  </div>
  by Ivan Žalac
</header>

### Early history and fantasy larps

When people from outside of Europe talk about the European larp scene,
various preconceptions come to mind. However, the European larp scene is
heavily fragmented across national and language borders, and its
influence is limited. This article is about the larp scene in Croatia—a
vastly different larp scene than, say, in Germany or Nordic
countries—and its current status in 2018.

The first larps ever held in Croatia, as expected, were fantasy larps.
When the Internet gained popularity back in mid-90s, several local
role-players learned about this hobby, mainly from American sources. The
first larp in Croatia was a chapter of *Amtgard*—only it wasn’t really
played the same way as the US *Amtgard* larps. It was a once-a-year
weekend event, like many popular larps in European countries are. It had
a turbulent history and several offshoots, some of which were registered
*Amtgard* chapters, while others were not. In present day, only one larp
remains from this period, Rajski Vrhovi—a yearly event still using
*Amtgard* rules and larp structure that’s been used since the early
days, although this year has seen little combat, yet plenty of story
development.

The structure for this sort of larp has remained similar. Players play
one or more groups, with their personal or group stories having little
(if any) effect on the general event story. The organizers set up a
timetable for the event, which usually starts on Friday evening with
parts of the story (“threat of the year”) being hinted at. Saturday is
mostly spent wandering around the game area and trying to find and
collect necessary items for the main threat-resolution on Saturday
evening. On Sunday everyone packs up and goes home. Required NPCs are
typically played by organizers and part-time by player volunteers. There
are some exceptions to this structure, but most of the time it closely
follows the plan above.

These larps once made up the vast majority of the Croatian larp scene.
Several organizers organized them as campaigns on a non-profit basis,
but transferring the characters and their stories between different
games was allowed, and they were all played more or less in the same
world. This larp scene peaked twice—once in mid-2000s, when the largest
campaign had about 150 players, and for a second time in the early
2010s, when there were several organizers who cooperated, and there were
often several larps per month—though most of them of the single-day
variety. As mentioned previously, only one larp of this style remains
currently.

Two other medieval fantasy larps should be mentioned. A project of mine,
*Terra Nova*, was played from 2012–2015, successfully finishing the
first chapter of its story. Yet the second chapter never happened, as
proposed changes were very different to what was played before. *Elder
Scrolls Chronicles* is an unofficial *Elder Scrolls* larp, and is not a
campaign—it’s a series of one-shots set in different time periods. The
event in 2017 was a major one and probably the closest thing to a
blockbuster larp that was organized in Croatia. It was the first event
in over two years though—and the future plans for the series are
unknown.

### Vampire and Steampunk

The second major category is vampire larps. The first ones started in
mid-2000s, but all of them eventually stopped; the current generation of
vampire larps was started by myself in 2013. Apart from the obviously
different setting and themes, their design and organization was vastly
different. Player participation and empowerment in story creation were
increased, and organization overhead reduced with regards to the plot.
In Croatia they are mostly played as political sandbox larps, with
players rarely interacting with the ruleset itself. In 2015, they
practically displaced fantasy larps as the most popular campaign larps
in the country, and they can still claim that.

And the final campaign larp—still played around here—is a steampunk one,
with the organizer producing a steampunk Austria-Hungary setting. It’s
typically a light-hearted larp, with politics, action, puzzles, and
plenty of mischief involved. One of the more interesting things about it
is that every event is unique, experimenting with structure, situations,
and even different types of play, such as battles being represented by
board games. There’s usually around 2–3 larps per year.

Izgon

My *Izgon* project doesn’t fall neatly into any of the above categories.
There have been four major event so far. The first *Izgon*, in 2013, was
highly secretive; players had no idea what they were signing on for,
except that it would be a pervasive urban fantasy larp with a five-week
duration. It had its issues, but for some players it was the most
influential larp of their lives. There were two sides, a solution, not a
lot of resources, and plenty of mystery. A sequel was made later in the
year, *Izgon 2*, with a far larger group of players all around the
world, and a shorter, three-week duration. 2015 saw a slightly different
reboot of the first Izgon. 2017 saw the short chamber larp *Izgon: The
Experiment*, as well as a weekend larp *Izgon: Ascendancy*, a sequel to
the 2015 reboot and *The Experiment*.

Each installment brought several changes to the writing as well as the
playstyle. While the first larp relied heavily on secrecy, the same
secrecy was not possible for future larps, which had many returning
players—and the word spread out to the new players. After the first two
events, I was joined as the organizer by the group of players playing
the Brokers—who played a faction in the larp which provided some puzzles
to be solved, for more goal-oriented players. With the rise of mobile AR
games such as *Ingress* and *Pokémon GO*, the original playstyle lost
some of the uniqueness. In contrast to the earlier larps, *Ascendancy*
was designed openly—each character was a member of at least 3 different
types of groups (Guild, Circle, and Origin). It was possible to have
someone from a different Circle and Origin in your Guild, etc. Each of
these groups had their own groups on Facebook, and some other media such
as Discord. Players got access to the groups prior to the larp, in order
to cooperatively create relationships and stories for their characters.

And yet these were just the visible characteristics. The best content in
these larps—like in most others—were created by players. Izgon motivated
some to think in different ways, to question what they’re told (as
characters’ backgrounds were written in the unreliable narrator style,
so there were intentional inconsistencies), to create in-character art,
and more. Since the setting and materials were released under Creative
Commons, we had players who created interesting projects such as a board
game in the setting and a published young adult novel written from one
player’s in-character perspective (which also happens to be the first
larp-based novel published in Croatia, as well as to my knowledge the
first Croatian YA lesbian love novel). Taken together, *Izgon* larps
were played by larpers all over Europe, as well as in the USA and China,
and there was content all over the world map. There are some players who
still use their character names from *Izgon* as nicknames.

### Chamber one-shot larps

One-shot larps (not connected to a campaign) didn’t really exist here
prior to 2011. The revolution was actually led by an Italian chamber
larp for 6 players, called *Love is Blue*. It wasn’t very well known in
Italy, but in Croatia it was nothing short of revelation, with about a
hundred runs so far, meaning the vast majority of larpers played it at
least once.

This larp was a direct influence for the Croatian chamber larp scene,
which began developing in 2012. It’s currently the largest one in the
country, recently outgrowing the vampire larp scene considering the
number of events.

Most of these are short larps—around one hour prep time, one hour
playtime—playable in almost any space with minimal decoration and props,
and reasonably well documented and replayable. They typically feature
either pregenerated characters (usually not too detailed, as plenty is
left for players to fill in the blanks) or some method of quickly
creating the characters.

While fantasy larps played here mostly focus on finding a solution to
the problem, vampire larps on the slow rise through politics, and
steampunk larps on theatricality, Croatian chamber larps mostly focus on
intensity of the experience and emotion. Invariably, they have
minimalistic mechanics, or often none at all beyond a few explanations
of what is and is not possible.

You can see a similar approach in *Arrival at Tau Ceti*, where the main
focus is getting into the mindset and relationships of people who live
together in a very tiny space, and everything that comes with that.
There are some tough questions to be dealt with, like would you have a
dating life if your only potential partners were your cousins? If every
relationship, affair, or breakup was public knowledge? If there’s no
privacy or escape, is there a hope for a better future? Who would you
be? The problem facing the characters is a backdrop rather than the main
theme of the larp, and while it also serves a purpose and focus for more
task-oriented players, it’s primarily a way to stir the feelings, hopes,
and dreams of characters. Any “solution” to the larp will work, because
the journey is what matters— as long as you focus on thinking, feeling,
and acting like your character.

Some of our local chamber larps have a specific solution. But most place
a hard focus on characters’ emotions. And in a way, they do this better
than our campaign larps, going for maximum drama—because the larp is
one-shot, there’s no impulse to play it safe for future larps. Players
tend to play intensely and with more risk to characters, because that
gives the strongest experience, and is more fun for others. All of this
is also covered during briefing and debrief, practices we’re getting
better at as the time goes on.

The rise of Croatian chamber larps led to two interesting developments.
One of them was PoRtaL, the local larp conference. After its first year
in Croatia, it started moving around every year, and eventually grew
into the regional larp conference. So far it has been organized three
times in Croatia, twice in Hungary, and once in Bulgaria, drawing
visitors and speakers from a far larger region, allowing us to share our
larp styles, knowledge, and techniques. The second of them was Terrible
Creations, where several organizers and their friends banded together to
form the first constant chamber larp team—and some time later, the first
Croatian larp company.

### Economy and the local situation

Other Croatian larp organizers run their larps on non-profit basis; in
some cases there’s a non-profit organization backing them, in other
cases there’s not. The vast majority of the current larp community in
Croatia is price-sensitive due to our economy (a feature shared with the
rest of the Southeastern European larp community), so most larps keep
their prices low and rely on volunteer work. Most larps are either free
to attend, or their price is kept under 150 kn (USD $23). Yet, since
last year, there have been several higher-budget projects, utilizing
local castles. The most expensive one so far was the last *Elder Scrolls
Chronicles*, costing around $100, which is still far lower than the
price of most major European castle events; on the other hand, still
none of them are for-profit, which is limiting to both the quality of
the props and the capability of organizers to reproduce such events. A
“school of magic” styled larp has been announced for later in 2018, so
there’s local potential for this style of events.

Even though, when we speak about “local”, Croatia is in fact a small
country, with a relatively small number of larpers, mostly located in
Zagreb. This means that international participation is crucial for most
of our largest larps (which by Croatian standards is anything over
twenty players). At most international larps in the region, English is
used as the lingua franca. Apart from our blockbuster-ish larps, plenty
of other larps so far have relied on international participation, such
as *Terra Nova*, *Elder Scrolls Chronicles*, plenty of vampire larps,
and my own *Izgon* project.

Recently, some new developments have taken place in the local chamber
larp scene. Several larps have been created by commission for companies
who ordered them—whether as a form of recreation and teambuilding for
their employees, or as a form of promotion for their product. Both of
these have occurred in several other countries at an earlier time, but
it does show potential that this is possible even in a scene which is
largely non-profit.

### Final thoughts

Overall, there’s plenty of larp variety in Croatia considering the size
of our scene. Most of these are run in or around Zagreb, however the
local chamber larp scene is well represented atvarious conventions
(sci-fi, fantasy, gaming, etc.) in Croatia, as well as the neighboring
Slovenia and of course the PoRtaL convention. There have been several
larps published online, and in English. Yet, as the scene grows, and
develops new structures and techniques or adapts them from other
sources, some of the old ones disappear.

Only five years ago, the local scene was completely different. Many
players and organizers are different as well. We picked up knowledge and
experience from other larp scenes, developing some of our own in the
process. And I have a feeling that five years from now it will grow into
something new again. I guess we’ll wait and see.
