---
layout: vol2
content_type: text/html
title: "Chekov’s Crew: The use of adjunct crew in theatre-style larps"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Chekov’s Crew</h2>
    The use of adjunct crew in theatre-style larps
  </div>
  by Stephanie Pegg
</header>

### Abstract

While common in live combat style larp campaigns, the use of crew to
play GM-directed characters in theatre-style (parlour) larps is
relatively rare in New Zealand. This article covers case studies of Kiwi
games written over the past six years which use this powerful technique
in different ways, and discusses the pragmatic, social, and artistic
reasons why the use of adjunct crew is beneficial to the theatre-style
genre.

### Introduction

It is a general axiom in New Zealand theatre-style larps that all
participants should be roughly equal: King Cophetua may be a king golden
and shining on his throne, but the Beggar Maid who’s wandering around in
rags should be equally rich in nous, quirks, and engaging plot
lines—what might be referred to as “everyone’s a star” and “there is no
‘main’ plot… there should be lots of plots, all of roughly equal
importance” (Harbrow). ‘Colour’ characters, which are there to provide
atmosphere or in some way be victims of the ‘main’ characters are
generally frowned on, because roleplaying these peripheral characters
for the duration of the larp can be dull for the players.[^1]
Conversely, game crew who play very high-powered non-protagonist
characters (NPCs) can consume the ‘oxygen’ of the larp and make it unfun
for the protagonist characters (PCs).[^2] Most New Zealand-written
theatre-style games default to basic design principles that fit in with
this axiom: all players should have characters of roughly similar plot
importance and general ‘busy-ness,’ and the characters and diegetic
elements that are fully present in the game space for the two to three
hour runtime are the ones that matter to the game.

This article is about Kiwi games that *don’*t fit in with this
default—our emerging tradition of using NPCs and dedicated crew to make
our game worlds richer, more complex—and more compatible with pragmatic
game-running considerations. Much as Chekov announced that hanging a gun
on the wall in Act One means it should be used in Act Two (“Chekov’s
Gun”), choosing to incorporate adjunct crew into your game gives you a
powerful tool that can and should be used in meaningful ways in the
design.

There are some overseas games I’ve seen that use different PC/NPC
models: for instance, horde games such as *Victoria Junction—All change
please, all change*! (Barnard et al.) use the structure of a small group
of characters who are permanent throughout the game, interacting with a
large number of bit characters played by a revolving crew. Another model
is to use highly directed non-protagonist characters to help the
organisers manage the game, such as in *The Dance and the Dawn*, which
uses the competing NPC roles of the Queen of Ice and the Duke of Ash to
discourage cooperation between players (Tusk, “Cowardice of your
Convictions” 63). To this toolkit, I want to add the use of live
combat–style crew rooms which are coordinated in game by the organisers;
the deliberate creation of minor NPCs for purely social reasons; and the
artistic merits of solving technical design problems with NPC roles
which physically embody the setting and game mechanics.

### The Social Larp

Despite my comments in the introduction, I actually like ‘colour’
characters—as long as they’re used mindfully; which is to say, they meet
social needs first. At, Kapcon, the large annual roleplaying convention
in my home town, we run a Saturday night flagship larp for somewhere
around 60 players. Kapcon started life as a tabletop roleplaying
convention and remains so—larps are welcome, but as a stream of the
convention, not its reason for being. What this means is that we have a
large pool of people who are friendly to the flagship larp and are
perfectly fine with helping dress the set, or bringing their kids over
in the evening to see the costume parade as larpers potter around
getting into their costume and makeup, and, of course, taking on minor
NPC roles to help out the organisers. This means that it’s easy to have
‘that one guy’ who likes to come along and play a door guard or minor
helpful person in the game, because he enjoys the energy of big larps
but is less keen on pursuing a character arc; it means that *Al Shir-Ma*
(Melchior et al), a fantasy inspired by the Arabic story collection *One
Thousand and One Nights*, was able to draw on a crowd of non-larpers to
be rowdy, noisy crowd for the first half hour of its debut run to help
settle the faction that entered the game through a marketplace
(Wellington 2011).

This principle of creating roles for casual larp-friendly people is one
that my sister and writing partner Catherine Pegg began using formally
for *Tesla’s Wedding* (Pegg and Pegg). This is a light-hearted steampunk
game that was originally created as a wedding gift for two young larpers
in our community. The original design brief, which ambitiously wanted
the game to be held on the day of the wedding,[^3] was to accommodate a
number of friends and relatives of the bride and groom, and my sister
created a special Hat Brigade group. In the game, these are assembled in
a staging area away from the main game, with a selection of costume
items (especially hats!) and nametags with high level character
descriptors of various people in the town—each Hat Brigade nametag comes
with a colourful name and a high-level descriptor (such as “Angelica
Darling: Awkward; Adorable” and “Righteous Fred: Born to hang…”) One PC
starts the game with a mailbag of letters to deliver at the start of the
game which references some of these characters, and they also have a set
of cards, the *What’s Going On Outside* deck, with random story prompts
that they can draw for character ideas then bounce into the main space
for a short period, before going back to the crew area to recast. These
can be very random (“Beans! Beans!”) or more directly linked to the tone
of the game (“Er, playing Cagliostro’s Concerto on a Glass Harmonica
doesn’t really drive people insane... right?”).[^4] This group forms a
nascent live combat–style crew to act under the game master’s (GM’s)
direction, broadening out the world and allowing control over game
pacing. They are able to introduce random elements, draw out plotlines
from the main characters, and fill the functional need of “what to do
when a player calls in sick”—the GM for the game has a pool of people
who can either be promoted to main characters, or briefly costume as one
of the no-shows and introduce game critical information as needed. If a
lot of people call in sick (this happened in one run), you may lose your
crew to character promotion, but casual NPCs are at least easier for a
GM to fudge.

We continued the use of a small crew in the Kapcon flagship *Fragrant
Harbour*, set in a marketplace in Hong Kong in 1899, which includes
stories inspired by both the historical setting (for instance,
colonialism and the opium trade) and traditional Chinese literature and
mythology (for instance, ghosts, the search for enlightenment, Asian
vampires, and the Bureaucrats of Hell) (Pegg et al.) The game has some
prewritten skeleton character sheets set up in the offstage area—for
townsfolk NPCs, there is general background and motivation and a lot of
“Things You Know” for the NPC to introduce at their own discretion.
There are also outlines for NPC members of The Society of Harmonious
Righteous Fists (better known in the West as the Boxer Rebellion) to
come into the game and be rowdy and recruit fighters to the cause; in
the debut run (Wellington 2013) this made them available for the PC with
ties to the Boxers to arrange for a small, planned riot that emerged out
of the game play. And the game uses crew to create a priming event early
in the game (two NPCs fight about a girl in the central marketplace
area: one dies and demonstrates to the players that character death is
both possible and not the end of the game for them, then moves to the
starting area for deceased characters to start making a fuss there and
demonstrating the Ghost rules). Near the end of the game, there is a
March of the Dead, a ceremony with some pomp and solemnity which draws
all current Ghost characters out of the larp area in a grand procession
that sends them on their way to Heaven or Hell depending on what in game
actions have happened for each character. This gives them a bang to exit
the game with, and the existence of the crew lets the players of now
permanently dead characters return into the game as NPCs to observe the
final flurry of activity prior to game close.

And we have found that “come along and crew for my game” can be
attractive to our friends on the more introverted side of the scale, who
don’t enjoy the intensity of main characters. They get to participate in
our enriching hobby at the level they’re comfortable—and bring their own
richness into our games.

### Priming and Game Steering

For the *Fragrant Harbour* debut, we also asked an experienced
roleplayer to take on a specific NPC role for the entire game, a senior
functionary to run the Anteroom of Hell, bully the player characters who
started there or arrived during the game, take bribes, and maintain the
area for incoming Ghosts. To help him, the character receives “Karma
Files”[^5]—a listing of the current characters and various in-character
notes about their current and former lives; these can be used for
reference or to allow other players to sneak glimpses as a way to seed
information into the game. By creating this character with a fully
outlined character sheet, but the expectations of “you are an NPC,” we
can ask that roleplayer to remain static in the location to help meet
the needs of the larp. A similar approach has been taken by Jenni
Dowsett in *The Silver Kiss of the Magical Twilight of the Full Moon*, a
comedy parody of the supernatural teen romance genre. The game is
written with four crew slots, three of which are in-character for the
duration of the game. These NPC roles have specific purposes—priming the
game by sharing information and secrets and being very over the top
characters for the PCs to react against, and, in the case of the
Principal, acting as an authority figure when needed. One of the NPCs is
swapped out near the end and recast to enter the game as a new character
ready to have a big dramatic scene and “to spur the various mortal
characters in the game to consider what \[are\] the best life choices
they could be making” (Sands). This staged scene isn’t the finale, but
it sets the tone for what the endgame should feel like for the
players—it defines the stakes for them; overall, the NPCs act to
reinforce the themes and atmosphere of the game.

This ‘NPC as Game Manager’ model is similar to that in *The Dance and
the Dawn* and relatively underused in New Zealand (it’s more common here
for the GMs to observe the game and referee rules or answer questions
without interfering; either out-of-character, unobtrusively
in-character, or briefly taking on solo NPC roles themselves to
introduce information before returning to the out-of-character referee
role.) From my experience as both GM and player, it’s an effective
technique. Talking about *Silver Kiss*, the author mentioned an
occasional downside where “the crew gets a bit too wrapped up in the
role or messing with players and start making things about themselves”
but added that over multiple runs this had been rare (Sands). And it’s
something that can be handled by expectation management and selecting
crew members whose play style prefers the dramatic to the competitive.

Matt Brunton, an experienced GM of both live-combat and theatre-style
games, uses crew to help pace his games, for example, in *The Heat at 3
AM*, an intense Noir game about criminals the night after a big job went
badly. In his view, “games that rely solely on the players developing
drama or getting plot out there have a greater chance of misfiring”
(Brunton). His techniques in *Heat* are similar to those he would use in
a weekend-long live combat game—using crew members to appear as cameos
to make sure necessary information is in the game (as insurance for
player no-shows), and to gauge tension and drama in the room and nudge
the game with plot points and named characters relevant to the
protagonists, giving them something to react against. Commenting about
the game, he has a preference for using external intervention in the
mid-game, leaving the first 15 minutes free for players to get into
character and form relationships, and the final phase free for final
decisions and story resolutions.

Another serious game, *Wilkinson-Baker Hall*, a Great War
upstairs-downstairs drama set in a *Downton Abbey*–esque great house,
introduced a crew room on its second run (McKenzie-Doornebosch and
Melchior). The first run (Wainuiomata 2013) was staged at a larp
convention in a large hall with the separate areas of the game divided
by partitions, and the two GMs playing all visiting NPCs. This provided
some challenges—there were at most two NPCs at a time, costume changes
were limited to signifying objects (hats, shawls, aprons) and were
played by women regardless of the identified gender of the character,
and if a player wanted follow-up contact with an NPC, there were
limitations—should the GMs change their plans for the next appearance,
or use a ‘telegram’ or ‘phone call’ conversation as a proxy? In the
second run (Petone 2016), held at a vintage villa, the game was spread
out on two floors of the house in multiple rooms. For straight
logistical reasons, there needed to be additional people taking on NPC
roles—it would take too long for two people to manage costume changes
with rushing up and down stairs in the more diffuse game space, and the
organiser made the addition of a dedicated crew of five people really
count. In the redesign, the crew is run by a Crew Coordinator who has a
lot of knowledge of the game, briefs outgoing NPCs, and takes their
feedback on what has happened while they were in-game to gauge which
NPCs should go in next. The crew has extensive documentation: a detailed
crew briefing and another document which has a paragraph of the key
points of each PC and prewritten NPC in the game. They also have generic
nametags for background NPCs (‘soldier,’ ‘villager,’ etc.) and are able
to print out new nametags for characters generated on the fly. The
primary goal of the NPCs (approximately 20 named characters) is to
increase pressure on the players. The investigative characters get
support from “people they know,” who can appear with information of use
to them, and the PCs who have something to hide have to be more aware of
people asking leading questions:

> If the journalist PC couldn’t be everywhere at once, or was struggling
> to wade through the lies that various characters were telling, then
> instead of those other characters getting to \[breathe\] a sigh of
> relief that they’d ‘gotten away with it’ and never have questions
> asked of them for the rest of the game, we could insert crew
> characters from the journalist’s own newspaper who’d received ‘leads’
> about various stories, and help prompt that journalist to look deeper
> in a specific direction. (McKenzie-Doornebosh)

The additional people supporting the game are also able to increase the
verisimilitude of the game—in the Petone 2016 run, they were able fully
costume to go with the vintage location and immersive set dressing—and
they play a variety of incoming people: highborn guests, tradespeople
bringing supplies to the house, the ill or injured arriving in the
Infirmary requiring care (another source of pressure for the medical
staff, who have a choice between pursuing personal issues and doing
their jobs), and they are able to flit in and out of the game as needed,
or take a longer dwell time to suit the mood of the scene and allow a
greater rapport to develop between PC and NPC. In some cases, players
have ‘locked on’ to an NPC as a friend and ally, and kept in touch
throughout the game. Another design change, two act breaks of time
passing, allows players to make offers (perhaps requesting information
from the War Office, or sending telegrams requesting an NPC visit, or
narrating in between actions) which the crew are able to facilitate.

My sister’s and my recent game *Break Room 3: Basilisk Green* (a
humorous take on the question ‘what do Wandering Monsters do on their
tea break?’ in a D&D-with-the-serial-numbers-filed-off dungeon) has
continued the use of crew rooms, partly for pacing but also to create
the outside world breaking into the protected space of the larp (Pegg
and Pegg). We took learnings from *Tesla’s Wedding* and *Fragrant
Harbour* and created crew briefing information to help them be as
self-directed as possible. In addition to a verbal briefing, the crew
are provided with a summary of all the plotlines in the game and single
page outlines of suggested encounters.[^6] These have specific hooks to
the characters; give some NPC names, abilities and motivations;
suggested timeframes; and relevant props. The crew have considerable
discretion and the general guideline of ‘get in there and make trouble.’
The design asks for a proportionately larger group compared to the crews
of *Tesla’s Wedding* and *Fragrant Harbour* (*Basilisk* calls for a crew
of three to five against a PC contingent of 17; its precursor games were
setting mini-crews of five against a PC contingent of 30 and 80), so
they have more impact on the game play. This suits the Joyful Chaos tone
of the game—the PC group are working through their interpersonal
intrigues but have frequent injections of ‘what the heck just happened?’
that might be specific to them, or available for them to witness. It
also allows many emergent plotlines to arise in the game: players can
request specific characters they know about to visit the Break Room; and
the crew are able to respond to PC actions without needing GM direction.
An example of this is from the April 2017 run in Wellington:

> \[early in the game, some minions are bothering their Boss on her
> coffee break\]
>
> Minions: Boss, boss, the supply clerk sent us syrup instead of
> Alchemist’s Fire.
>
> Long Suffering Boss: \[sighs\] Take the syrup, pour it on some
> adventurers and then, I don’t know, lick them or something.
>
> \[later in the game, a group of Surface Adventurers storm into the
> room with unfinished business and complaining about the day they’ve
> had\]
>
> Adventurers: And then some monsters covered us with syrup and licked
> us!
>
> \[the staff in the Break Room follow this up by trying to recruit the
> Adventurers to the cause of Evil.\]

This is not a plotline that it would have occurred to me to write into
this game or any other, but I’m thoroughly glad it happened.

### Informing Artistic Considerations

This final section discusses two larps that were written to challenge
the boundaries of the form, and had contrasting design issues that the
use of NPCs solved. As is usually the case, embracing the Big Flaw in
your design usually takes you to interesting and elegant solutions, and
these games are no exception.

*Into the Woods* is a dark fairy tale inspired by Harvey’s and Samyn’s
video game *The Path*: in the larp, Lost Child characters get lost in
the wood and continue wandering until they find a resolution with the
Wolf they both fear and are fascinated by (Pegg and Pegg). The
characters are written as protagonist/antagonist dyads and, because of
the premise of the game, any given pair can be dropped out of the game
but an individual player calling in sick at short notice is going to
cause serious problems. The solution was to create NPC slots, in this
game called Wood Sprites—if we have a no show, we can either promote up
a Wood Sprite into the protagonist part, or we can recast the orphaned
protagonist into a Wood Sprite.[^7] This early design choice influenced
the rest of the game—in addition to providing unobtrusive characters for
the GMs to play and adding atmosphere (mischievous creatures popping out
of the woods to giggle and tease the players), the Wood Sprite crew
members are used to control the game movement.

Another design choice is that the players should keep walking throughout
the game, partly to stop a big clog of people observing a scene with
other people instead of focusing on their own interactions, but mostly
because I wanted them to feel *tired*, with all the physical and
emotional feedback that brings. The players are given this instruction,
but still have had the urge to congregate and stop moving—the Wood
Sprites have a game call “Push-Me-Pull-You” to remind the Lost Child
characters to follow them. There is also a game rule that the Lost
Children have to stay with someone with a black headband. In the first
phase of the game, this means the Wood Sprites can lead them on a tour
of the game space and make sure they encounter each Wolf at least once.
After this, the game stages a tilt event[^8] where everyone gathers
together for a rest and food break, and the Wolf characters change the
tone of their interactions to more conciliatory (as antagonists they are
given more GM-direction than the protagonists).[^9] At this point, the
Wood Sprites become less active guides and let the Lost Children begin
splitting up, choosing their own paths, and having more independent and
intimate conversations with their partners. It has been a useful feature
to have the additional people nudging the flow of an unusual game into
the desired story groove.

*The Bell*, an amnesia game set on a broken spaceship in the ‘space
travel as spiritual journey’ genre, had very much opposite design issues
(Pegg and Pegg). I wasn’t worried about people dropping out because I’d
designed the game to be very flexible on player numbers. What I did need
to do is account for character deaths from a very early stage in the
game. One of my design criteria was that the game should be high stakes
from the moment the characters wake up—there is a lot of information on
*how* to fix the ship in the game; the question is “what are you willing
to sacrifice to make that happen?” and the setting allows no way for
everyone to get home safely. The conflict mechanic is very simple and
brutal (if you ‘attack’ someone, they are automatically injured; if you
attack someone enough times, the character dies), with the intent that
in the confined space and stressful setting it will encourage the feel
of a claustrophobic horror movie where the external threat pushes
internal conflict.

Which brings me to: what if the players in this game are very aggressive
from the beginning of the game? I didn’t want a deceased PC to have to
walk out of the room, so I created the role of Revenant—a gruesome
setting detail is that the ship can cannibalise dead passengers and wire
them into its navigation system as a jury-rigged repair; the Revenants
preserve some memories from life while co-opted to the needs of the
ship. This got rolled into the writing: things like speculation on what
other technologies are enough like the human brain to pass; what happens
when the Revenant who is present at the beginning of the game is someone
close to a PC; and what does it mean to be human, anyway? To give more
complications, the Revenants navigate the ship through hyperspace
(popularly called “Heaven”) which is inimical to people going
outside—the player group can send one trained person outside to fix life
support, knowing that they will die, or they can kill the Revenant and
drop into normal space, fix things at their leisure and take a century
to reach their destination, adding conflict based on how badly each
character wants to get home on time.

It has also given rise to a lot of emergent plots in the different runs
of the game. In one run (Auckland 2016), the players were happily
volunteering themselves to become Revenants in the first act—until they
realised they were going to have roleplay murdering each other and had
serious second thoughts. In another (Wainuiomata 2012), the player group
tried *hard* to preserve the memories of the prewritten Revenant with
tears and goodbyes all round; in the debut run (Auckland 2011) this
Revenant was killed off very quickly and quite callously and the player
group tried *hard* to find a solution with least loss of life—until the
final act turned into a bloodbath. The end game phase involved four
deceased characters emotionlessly repeating the status changes of the
ship, picking up on what each was saying in a continuing loop. To me,
the GM of this run, this was *eerie*. In the Christchurch 2014 run, the
organiser sent feedback about the extremely complicated, last minute
shenanigans involving betrayal and murder to create a new Revenant so
that the two final characters could end the game blissed out on the
sounds of Heaven (Cohen). What began as a practical choice to solve a
design problem deeply informed the themes and planned plotlines of the
game—and it has opened up a multiplicity of emergent stories: each run
of *The Bell* is utterly unique.[^10]

### Conclusion

There are very many ways to write a good larp (that is, meeting the
participants’ needs for entertainment, meaning, and social contact.) A
friend has described the act of writing a theatre-style larp with the
Chekov’s Gun metaphor: put “a lot of big, shiny, sexy guns on that
mantelpiece, and make sure there are more than enough to go round. Then
throw in a few knives and hand grenades for good measure” (Harbrow).
This article has discussed the ways in which the mindful use of NPCs
forms an armoury of Chekov’s Guns: the colour characters, the game
managers, the bursts of the outside world breaking into your larp’s
magic circle, defining the stakes and setting the tone, physically
embodying the game mechanics… That armoury is worth polishing up,
carefully priming with black powder, and firing at will.

### Works Cited

Barnard, Nickey, Jerry Elsmore, Alex Jones, Sue Lee, Tym Norris and Mark
Steedman. *Victoria Junction—All change please, all change!* 2009. Live
action roleplay game.

Brunton, Matt. *The Heat at 3 AM*. 2015. Live action roleplay game.

Brunton, Matt. Private email. Sent 9 May 2017.

“Chekov’s Gun.” Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chekhov%27s_gun.
Accessed 4 May 2017.

Cohen, Daphne. Private email. Sent 17 Jun. 2014.

Dowsett, Jenni. *The Silver Kiss of the Magical Twilight of the Full
Moon*. 2011. Live action roleplaying game.

“GMs are bastards.” *Diatribe*, http://diatribe.co.nz/t/gms-are-bastards/7387.
Accessed 6 May 2017.

Fatland, Eirik & Lars Wingård. “The Vow of Chastity.” Dogma 99, 1999,
2000. http://fate.laiv.org/dogme99/en/. Accessed 9 May 2017.

Harbrow, Malcolm. “A KapCon LARP Manifesto.” 25 Jul. 2009.
http://homepages.inspire.net.nz/~idiot/gaming/larpmanifesto.html.
Accessed 7 May 2017.

McKenzie-Doornebosch, Hannah and Sophie Melchior. *Wilkinson-Baker
Hall*. 2013. Live action roleplaying game.

Melchior, Sophie, Ellen Couch, and Dale Elvy. *Al Shir-Ma*. 2011. Live
action roleplaying game. Published by Imaginary Empire.

Morningstar, Jason. *Fiasco*. Bully Pulpit Games, 2009.

Pegg, Catherine and Stephanie Pegg. *Tesla’s Wedding*. 2012. Live action
roleplaying game. Published by Flying Monkeys. Debut run used the name
*Perambulate We Merrily*.

Pegg, Catherine, Stephanie Pegg and Ellen Boucher. *Fragrant Harbour*.
2013. Live action roleplaying game.

Pegg, Stephanie and Catherine Pegg. *The Bell*. 2011. Live action
roleplaying game. Published by Flying Monkeys.

Pegg, Stephanie and Catherine Pegg. *Into the Woods*. 2012. Live action
roleplaying game.

Pegg, Stephanie and Catherine Pegg. *Break Room 3: Basilisk Green*.
2015. Live action roleplaying game.

Sands, Jenni. Private email. Sent 4 May 2017.

Harvey, Auriea and Michaël Samyn. *The Path*. Tale of Tales.
tale-of-tales.com/ThePath. 18 Mar. 2009.

Tusk, Warren. [“The Cowardice of your Convictions”](/vol1/the-cowardice-of-your-convictions), *Game Wrap*, vol. 1,
2016, pp. 58-63,
http://gamewrap.interactiveliterature.org/vol1/GameWrapVol1.pdf. Accessed 6 May
2017.

Tusk, Warren. *The Dance and the Dawn*. 2006. Live action roleplaying
game.

<hr/>

*Stephanie is a New Zealand larper who has been playing, organising, and
writing larps since 2003. She’s interested in the deep structure of how
larps work, as well as having an uncomplicated time doing the pretty
pretending to be someone else. Her published games are available from
DriveThruRPG:
http://www.drivethrurpg.com/browse/pub/3687/Flying-Monkeys.*

[^1]: For instance: “Colour Characters are those who exist (in my head)
    to be there for the main characters to get something from, or kill,
    or just to wander around the periphery of the game and look pretty.”
    (user QueenOrTart) and “The reason to avoid them is that they have
    nothing to do, and that makes for dull larping. Even a player who
    doesn’t want to play a mover-and-shaker should still have things to
    do that will keep the player entertained and interacting.” (user
    Ryan\_Paddy) in the discussion “GMs are bastards.”

[^2]: I prefer to expand out these acronyms as Protagonists and
    Non-Protagonists (instead of Players and Non-Players) to emphasise
    the storytelling function of the characters, as opposed to the
    physical person playing the part. In this article, I will be
    referring to participants who roleplay as PCs as players or the
    player group, and people who roleplay as NPCs as crew.

[^3]: In the end, tradition won and the debut larp was its own separate
    event.

[^4]: Pegg, Catherine and Stephanie Pegg. *Tesla’s Wedding*. 2012.
    “Nametags” and “What’s Going On” deck.

[^5]: Pegg et al. *Fragrant Harbour*. 2013. “Karma Files.”

[^6]: Pegg and Pegg. *Break Room 3: Basilisk Green*. 2016. “GM Cheat
    Sheets” and “Crew Cheat Sheets.”

[^7]: Ironically, the two runs of this larp have been the extremely rare
    instances in my GMing career where we had a full turnout with no
    last minute replacement players.

[^8]: That is, a scheduled event that causes the game to have a major
    change in tone. This term is adapted from the Tilts used in the
    *Fiasco* story game by Jason Morningstar.

[^9]: The rest break is another pragmatic choice (the need to let mobile
    players sit down and get some calories and water) that turned into
    an artistic device. That sense of relief of “and now I can sit down”
    gives the Wolves a good opening to renegotiate their relationships,
    and they are directed to offer food or drink to their Lost Child as
    a signifier of this.

[^10]: With regards to spoilerability and the amount of detail I’ve
    provided for *The Bell*—I really dig the Dogma 99 principle of open
    documentation (Fatland and Wingård): this game runs well with people
    who have played it before or read the game. (Obviously, the Dogma 99
    strictures against GM control during the game and ‘superficial
    action’ are less relevant to my writing style.)
