---
layout: vol2
content_type: text/html
title: Editor's Note
---

<header>
  <div class="midline">
    <div class="midline-line left"></div>
    <h1 class="text-uppercase">Editor's Note</h1>
  </div>
</header>

<img src="/vol2/images/editors-note-portrait.jpg" alt="Viktoriya Fuzaylova" class="editors-note-portrait" />

Welcome to the second volume of NEIL’s *Game Wrap*&mdash;a publication
dedicated to the art and craft of LARP. It has been a year of adjustment
and changes as we’ve worked to bring you this sophomore effort and
continue to think about what Game Wrap could be, how to realize that
vision, how to carry it through logistically and what role it plays in
the New England larp community and beyond. We have expanded our staff
and streamlined our process, and look forward to more growth as we put
our efforts into supporting authors and encouraging writing about larp
as a complementary endeavor to writing and playing in larps.

The landscape of larp has seen much change in the last decade, and there
is a sense of acceleration and momentum to that growth. There has been
greater public visibility of LARP and its uses from coverage in the
*Business Insider*[^1], teaching LARP basics in a [Lexington summer
camp](http://www.larpadventureprogram.com/), to even news of plans for
a Disney Star Wars immersive resort where guests costume and roleplay in
the stories set in the Star Wars universe[^2].

Larp is education, larp is in tourism, larp is news, larp is activism.
At the same time it can be easy to feel disconnected and left out of the
loop of the innovative developments in larp, if one maintains larp as a
hobby balanced against the rest of one’s obligations. I’ve felt this
firsthand as I moved across the country and plunged into a different
local larp culture with its own norms and traditions. Larp publications,
like all publications, can serve as a way to connect with a particular
community and more so for communities largely separated by geography and
differing larp cultures. They are a way to connect intellectually and
share ideas, and for a reader a way to learn something new.

One goal for *Game Wrap* has been to provide such an opportunity to share
the NE larp culture and foster a cultural cross-pollination that helps
develop larp as a pastime and an art form. Another goal, in support of
the first, is to provide another avenue for the development of larp
culture in giving space for more long-form and slower discussion of a
topic than in the delightful spur of the moment conversations late into
a con evening or even a moderated discussion at NELCO. We believe that
creating this space gives us a way to deepen a culture of reflexivity
and analysis in the NE larp community, and allows us to learn about the
great variety and creativity of thought and design behind our favorite
games.

It has been personally exciting to think along with one of the author’s
included in this volume about the work of creating “truth” within the
artifice of playing pretend, to learn from another of the experiences at
Peaky Midwest about the challenges of teaching others how to write a
game, to get a glimpse into the larp traditions being developed
internationally and how they tackle familiar problems of immersion and
engagement in familiar and innovative ways, and to notice the wealth of
community building expertise represented by all the authors. It has also
been illuminating to see how limitations can drive creativity and how
good things sometimes really do come in small packages in our selection
of some ingenious micro larps.

Take a read through this second volume, enjoy, question, and critique.
Talk to your friends. By all means, disagree. And then add your own
thoughts and expertise to the discussion, in Vol. 3. We at Game Wrap
believe that it will enrich us all and continue to expand the scope of
what larp can be.

Viktoriya Fuzaylova

[^1]: Renfro, Kim. “'Harry Potter' fans are living out their fantasies at a real-Life school for wizards.” *Business Insider*, Business Insider, 23 Jan. 2016, http://www.businessinsider.com/harry-potter-annual-larp-event-in-poland-2016-1

[^2]: Fickley-Baker, Jennifer. “Plans Unveiled for Star Wars–Inspired
    Themed Resort at Walt Disney World.” Disney Parks Blog, 15 July
    2017, http://disneyparks.disney.go.com/blog/2017/07/plans-unveiled-for-star-wars-inspired-themed-resort-at-walt-disney-world/
