---
layout: vol2
content_type: text/html
title: "Peaky Midwest: Running a Weekend LARP Writing Workshop"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Peaky Midwest</h2>
    Running a Weekend LARP Writing Workshop
  </div>
  by Eva Schiffer
</header>

*This article was written in 2016 and does not reflect some of the
difficulties and lessons of the 2017 Peaky Midwest workshop.*

[The Peaky Midwest LARP writing workshop](http://www.peakymidwest.com/) is a yearly workshop that
helps new writers tackle creating LARPs and motivates experienced
writers to put together small games for the community to enjoy. We have
learned a lot about writing LARPs and about teaching people to write
LARPs since the first event in 2012.

I have been the primary organizer of the Peaky Midwest LARP writing
workshop since 2014. Here are some of the challenges the workshop has
faced and the lessons I’ve learned.

### The Format of the Workshop and the Style of Games

Peaky Midwest is a weekend workshop that is run once a year in the
spring or early summer. On Friday evening we gather at the site, have
dinner, brainstorm ideas for games, and break into groups of three to
five people. Each group works on a different game over the rest of the
weekend. The groups have a few hours on Friday night to spend
brainstorming the beginning of their game design and characters before
everyone retires to sleep. On Saturday we do the bulk of the game
writing. Most teams are finished with a playable draft by midnight. On
Sunday we playtest our games in two hour slots.

Peaky Midwest grew out of the tradition of [the Peaky LARP writing
workshop in the UK](http://peakygames.wikidot.com/). The majority of the writers at Peaky Midwest are
from the Chicago community centered around [Fete Fatale Productions](http://fetefatale.com/)
and there is a good deal of cross pollination with the Intercon
community around Boston. Because we are teaching through mentorship,
most of the games we write are similar to small, secrets-and-powers
style LARPs (often light on the “powers” part) from those communities.
There is [a more detailed attempt to describe our common game style
expectations](http://www.peakymidwest.com/style.html) on the Peaky Midwest website.

We encourage both new and experienced writers to try new things that
they are excited about, regardless of how they push our boundaries and
expectations. This has led to some fascinating games that stray away
from the traditional secrets-and-powers tropes and into new and
experimental (at least for us!) territory.

### What Has Worked

For the last few years we have used online pre-registration, starting
about six months before the workshop. This helped us to gauge interest
and plan spaces, supplies, and menus. It also gave us a way to make sure
that our contact information for attendees remains current. Peaky
Midwest sends email receipts when people pre-register so that there is
no confusion about whether or not their submission went through.

The workshop charges a small fee to writers in order to provide both
physical writing materials and catered meals throughout the weekend.

Writing materials include easel pads and stands, Post-it notes,
painter’s tape for hanging stuff on walls, washable colored markers, and
printer paper. Not every group uses all these supplies, but every group
uses at least some of them. As organizers we can buy supplies cheaply in
bulk, store extras between workshops, and ensure that there is enough
for everyone who pre-registers. We also make sure that writers are using
materials like *washable* markers and *painter’s tape* that won’t
inadvertently damage the space our hosts have so kindly let us use.

We collect information about attendees’ dietary needs during
pre-registration and plan a menu to give everyone tasty options. This
can be a challenge, since we have faced feeding people who need
vegetarian, vegan, gluten-free, low-carb, and diabetic-friendly food all
in the same year, as well as needing to juggle a number of specific food
allergies to things like beans or red dye. Despite these complications,
it has been worth it to go the extra mile in planning for everyone.
Having good things each attendee can enjoy has been a big morale booster
and has given writers more time to focus on writing. Getting and eating
food takes up less time and you can still have useful breaks from
writing to refuel. Serving batches of fresh baked cookies in the
evenings was a particular crowd pleaser for relatively minor cost and
effort.

Our 2016 cook cut back on the cooking workload at the workshop a good
deal by pre-preparing and freezing many foods that freeze well like
soup, spaghetti sauce, and cookie dough. We also received donations of
homemade, frozen cookie dough from several other attendees. Our cook cut
costs by shopping for many bulk ingredients at inexpensive or bulk
stores like Aldi’s and Costco. He noted that having a dishwasher
available was extremely helpful, as serving so many people quickly
dirties serving dishes and flatware, even if you are using disposables
for people to eat off of.

We have held the workshop in increasingly large private homes as our
pool of attending writers has grown. Having enough space to gather
everyone in one room for brainstorming on Friday night and giving each
writing group relatively sound separated working areas has worked well.
We find that we need enough space to have chairs for everyone during the
brainstorming session, with a little extra for a facilitator and an
easel pad for notes. More space than that is helpful and makes
brainstorming feel less cramped, but isn’t necessary. While groups are
working on their games on Friday and Saturday a lot of discussion goes
on inside each group, and having spaces that give some sound separation
for writing groups makes it much easier to focus on the game you are
creating. For games that have secrets, separate spaces also limit
unintentional leaks of secret game information to potential playtesters.

We find it helpful to have enough space to run two separate playtests at
a time on Sunday while still giving people who aren’t involved in
playtesting somewhere to rest. Since 2014, we have had enough writing
teams that we need to run some concurrent playtests to make sure that
all the groups get a chance to test their games. Most writers are
exhausted by Sunday afternoon and those who aren’t actively playtesting
need time and space to decompress and relax.

Before the Friday night brainstorming session, we talk some about
expectations, scheduling, communication, and team structure. All of
these are suggestions, but it helps to give writers a place to start
when planning how they tackle their games and deal with other team
members. More experienced writers usually have a better idea of how they
are comfortable deviating from the suggestions.

We have specific policies about how intellectual property developed at
Peaky Midwest is handled. These both allow writers to retain their
rights to their IP and ensure that writers can individually work on a
game after the workshop is over. They also ensure that games won’t be
published with author names attached unless the authors can review what
is going to be published. The exact details of the rules we laid out are
less important than the fact that we have rules and we communicate them
to all the attendees before we start brainstorming ideas on Friday so
they know what is expected.

During brainstorming, we have great success starting with a few minutes
of silent writing so that all writers have a chance to contribute some
ideas before we open the floor. This also means that shyer writers do
not need to speak up in front of everyone; they just have to hand over
some Post-it notes with ideas.

It has also worked well to take several short breaks after we have an
initial board of brainstormed game ideas to let everyone mingle and talk
about what appeals to them. This allows people to consider the ideas and
find out if others are interested in working on similar things. It
allows writers to communicate with their potential teammates one-on-one
rather than in front of a whole room full of eyes turned towards just
them.

We encourage all attendees to bring laptops to work on. Because
different teams choose different file sharing strategies, it is helpful
to have full featured laptops available for each writer. We further ask
attendees to bring laptops to share with others if pre-registration
answers suggest they will be needed.

We encourage attendees to bring printers if they can. Having multiple
printers that can be easily accessed by a common wired standard like USB
makes printing game materials on Saturday evening much easier and
faster. The last thing tired writers want to do is sit around waiting in
a queue for a single printer late on Saturday night. We also encourage
writers to configure and test their printers beforehand, so they will
have minimal setup struggles at the workshop.

The teaching aspect of the workshop is handled through active
mentorship. We try to make sure that each team has at least half
experienced writers and they are expected to help and guide less
experienced members of their team. This has generally worked well for
us, and our pool of experienced writers has grown over the years.

### What Has Not Gone so Well

Our budget has historically covered the food that we are going to feed
our attendees, but not any money to pay a cook to make that food a
reality. This means that we’ve relied on a volunteer cook.
Unfortunately, feeding twenty to thirty people for an entire weekend
requires a great deal of work. It is basically a full-time job, leaving
a cook no time to work on writing a LARP. Because of this, we have had a
difficult time finding someone willing to take that (somewhat intense)
job. So far we have been able to find people to step in and fill the
role, but several of them did it out of necessity or as a favor to the
organizers. We would very much prefer to have someone doing the cooking
who actively wants to take this role at the workshop.

Because most of the tools available to share files and collaborate on
writing require internet access, we find that the workshop needs high
quality wifi access which can stand the load of our many participants.
Most writers will have at least two connected devices (a laptop and a
smartphone) and some may have several more than that. Consumer grade
hardware is sufficient for small workshops, but could be overloaded with
twenty to thirty people. We used Ubiquiti hardware the last two years,
and even with multiple access points, the quality wasn’t quite what we
wanted. Hopefully we will be able to tune the wireless coverage at the
site to improve internet access during future events.

We have learned through hard experience that forming writing groups is
difficult. We want everyone to be working on something they are excited
about with people they are excited to write with. There are many places
where group formation can go poorly and we have found a good number of
those unintentionally over the years.

We found that groups of six are too big for the workshop format. Six
writers have a much more difficult time communicating well and staying
on the same page. Often one or two members of the group will feel
neglected and ignored and will lose enthusiasm for working on the
project. This happens even when some members of a group are “part-time”
writers due to illness or other responsibilities. We now recommend that
groups remain in the range of three to five writers, with a preference
for four or five.

It is very easy to fail to spread experienced writers around evenly. We
have had at least one team where there was only one experienced writer
and three new writers. No one realized the imbalance until after all of
the teams were all formed and it was too late to correct it. This put
way too much pressure on the one experienced writer to handle all the
mentoring in that team alone. We now encourage experienced writers to
monitor the experience levels of the groups as we’re trying to form the
writing teams. This has worked somewhat better than the other strategies
we tried in the past, but there is probably an even better solution that
we have yet to find.

We have had problems at every single workshop forming the last of the
teams. In several cases we let teams leave the brainstorming area as
they formed. Since most of the writers were gone by the time we got to
the last group, we couldn’t shuffle people around to make the last team
out of people with shared ideas and desires. On the other hand, keeping
teams that have formed in the brainstorming area risks them becoming
extremely bored and not paying attention to further groups or beginning
to discuss the game they want to make and distracting everyone. There is
probably a better way to manage moving people around as we agree on the
ideas we want to pursue and it will take some more experimentation to
find it.

We didn’t previously make strong recommendations about the number of
players our writers should try to make their games for, but over the
years it has become clear that games with more than ten players are
difficult to find enough playtesters to fill. There is also a huge
amount of work needed to get so many characters fully written by Sunday,
and this can lead to much greater time pressures on the team writing
them. In the future we intend to more strongly encourage people to keep
their game size to ten or fewer player characters. If they want to have
more than ten characters, it would probably be a better idea to plan on
writing any characters over ten at some point after the workshop.

We have found that having a dedicated person to schedule the playtests
is the only way to fit all the games into the time and people that we
have available on Sunday. Invariably some attendees will need to arrive
late or leave early on Sunday, so there are limits on when they can be
in or be running playtests. Before 2016 we struggled to make all the
playtests happen, and often one of the games simply didn’t get tested on
Sunday.

In 2016, our cook went around late on Saturday and got information on
all the games. He asked about things like when people were arriving and
leaving, who was on each writing team, how many GMs their game needed to
run, and if there was a specific gender balance of player roles. He took
all this information and spent several hours arranging all the pieces to
come up with a schedule of playtests for the next day that would allow
us to field enough playtesters in each slot.

We still had some difficulty arranging for the needed playtesters at the
required times, but we managed to playtest all of the games. We are
hopeful that in future years we can attract more playtesters who are not
also writers in order to make this task easier. It is clear however that
even with more playtesters, we will need someone to spend an hour or two
on Saturday night to schedule everything.

We have occasionally had difficulties getting feedback about our
failures from our attendees. Many people feel that it would be unkind to
be openly critical of the workshop and this can make it difficult to
learn where we are doing poorly. In the future we are planning to make a
greater effort to offer attendees anonymous surveys after the event so
that they will hopefully feel more comfortable telling us what did not
work for them.

One of the purposes of the workshop is to create games that other
LARPers can run or play. We have been somewhat successful in this, in
that many of the games written at Peaky Midwest have been run in Chicago
events, in San Jose, or in the Boston area at Intercon. However, most of
our games are still not publically available online.

It takes a lot of work to polish a game from the point where an author
can easily run it to the point where a stranger can easily run it. In
general, we estimate that preparing a game for publication will take
about twice as much work as the team did at the workshop, hopefully
spread out over a much longer time so it is less stressful. In the
future we are hoping to encourage more of our authors to polish their
games for publication, so we can add them to [our web store](https://payhip.com/PeakyMidwest) and use
any profits to fund future Peaky Midwest workshops. We are also working
on publication recommendations to help our authors more easily polish
their games to a high standard.

### Advice for Writers

The following is advice that we have given to writers attending the
workshop. Some of it is specific to the workshop format and some is
general advice for LARP writing. It is included here in the hopes that
it will be helpful to other organizers and writers.

*Be kind to your teammates*. We are all friends here, so please treat
each other as friends and do your best to listen to each other. Tell
your teammates the things you are excited to build, but try to accept
that not everyone will be as excited about them as you. You will be able
to find common ground that works for all of you. When your teammates say
no, even if they say it gently, take it as a no. You can always take the
game in different directions after the workshop if you still disagree
about what excites you in the design.

*Set limits on the content and behavior you plan to include in your
game*. Talk to your teammates about what you are comfortable with
creating and listen to what they say about what they want to create. If
you agree on a limit, stick to it.

*Have a team leader who helps to keep you on task and organized*. It is
way easier to manage the workload of writing a game if you have someone
watching the big picture and managing time. A good team leader is not a
dictator, but rather someone who helps the team members to work together
efficiently and communicate clearly with each other. A good leader
listens far more than they talk and does their best to make sure all
team members are heard.

*Have a team caregiver who makes sure everyone is taking care of their
physical needs*. It’s easy to be so focused on getting a game done that
you fail to do things like eat or stretch when you need to. A team
caregiver helps to keep that from becoming a crisis by watching the
other members of the team and reminding them to take better care of
themselves.

*Plan to take time to rest and to sleep*. Agree on when you are going to
stop working each evening and then do that, no matter what state your
game is in. Most people write much better and much faster when they’re
rested.

*Keep an eye on the big picture schedule (this is a good task for the
team leader)*. We recommend sketching out your game design and
characters on Friday and sleeping on those ideas. Often sleeping will
bring up new connections and ideas that make your game stronger. On
Saturday morning, finish the majority of the large scale planning and
design so you can get down to writing the game materials over the rest
of Saturday. If you get your game printed out and ready to go on
Saturday night, Sunday is much less stressful.

*Get the game to a minimal playtestable format first*. Especially if you
are writing a large game, get your game to the absolute minimum needed
for playtesting before you make it nice. It’s better to playtest
character sheets made up of a list of bullet points than it is to have
some of your sheets filled with beautiful prose and others totally empty
on Sunday morning.

*Playtesters will be understanding and the playtest is short*.
Playtesters know that you’ve only had a day and a half to get this game
ready and they’re going to be understanding of flaws and holes in your
game. The playtest slots are only two hours and that includes all the
out-of-game discussions like the introduction and game wrap. You really
only need to deliver an hour to an hour and a half of in-game time, so
don’t stress out if your game feels a little thin on content.

### Conclusion

Peaky Midwest has faced many challenges and we have done our best to
learn from our failures. We will continue to learn, grow, and evolve,
building a better workshop as we go. Hopefully this article will help
others avoid the same pitfalls we’ve found and encourage them to
organize workshops of their own to help writers realize their ideas and
give us all more great LARPs to play.
