---
layout: vol1
content_type: text/html
title: "Harnessing the Glowing Rectangle: Using Mobile and Computer Technology in LARP Play"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Harnessing the Glowing Rectangle</h2>
    Using Mobile and Computer Technology in LARP Play
  </div>
  by Matthew Webb
</header>

We are living in an interesting and great time in live action role play.
In addition to the growing visibility of our hobby, unprecedented
amounts of graphic and communications technology is available to
organizers and players in the form of mobile platforms such as
smartphones and tablets. With portable computing becoming so cheap and
accessible, many larpwrights and designers are turning their eye to
them, seeing how these devices can be integrated into the live action
experience.

The great news is mobile technology can be leveraged into the LARP
experience by almost anyone to different degrees. But there are
important pitfalls and limitations to consider before taking your game
down this path.

I have been experimenting with integrating technology into LARP for over
five years now, as well as collaborating and trading notes with games
from Prague to Los Angeles, and am currently heading the groundbreaking
[Planetfall science fiction LARP](http://www.prepareforplanetfall.com), which
makes use of dedicated mobile apps and augmented reality to create an
immersive and automated game experience. That road has given me some
strong lessons I hope to guide you with here.

</div>

<img src="/vol1/images/harnessing-the-glowing-rectangle-tablet.jpg" class="img-responsive" />

<div class="content-container">

### Should you use technology?

This is the single biggest question—should you use the power of
technology in your game? Mobile and computer technology is very
tempting. It is new, interactive, and flashy. But not every game is
suitable for it.

The largest consideration is genre. Science fiction, from space opera to
cyberpunk, is the most obvious choice to integrate computers—they do not
break immersion and are easy to justify. For decades, movies and
television have told us the future is going to be made up of glowing
rectangles. Modern and post-apocalyptic games can also integrate them
easily, depending on the game’s background story.

Medieval fantasy is one of the most popular genres and one of the most
difficult to integrate without harming immersion. Technology has to be
hidden, but the careful use of facades and set dressing, as well as
limiting exposure during actual gameplay, can leverage these into a
fantasy game.

Even if your genre does not easily allow for the immersive use of
technology, online software and apps can still offer you easy
bookkeeping, player communication, and downtime management in campaign
games—though this can be a serious undertaking, as we’ll talk about
later.

### Some Basic Rules

Here are my basic rules for integrating technology into your games:

#### Rule 1: It will take longer than you think

How long do you think your new software will take to write? Come on, be
pessimistic. Okay, now double that. Are you relying on someone else,
especially a volunteer, to do the work for you? Okay, double it again.
If you are not particularly technical, double a third time. Then maybe
you are close to what is needed.

Software development takes time. Part-time volunteer software
development takes an eternity. Most games that have an active and useful
integration of technology have owners and founders as the programmers
themselves—and even then, it just takes more time than you think.

### Rule 2: Plan for the future

Don’t do the same work twice if you have to. In software development, we
refer to problems in old approaches holding us back as “technical
debt”—a hole you’ve dug due to the way you chose to do things that you
now have to dig yourself out of if you want to be more efficient,
effective, or expandable.

Don’t be afraid to tear down the old code and spend the time to make new
software that does everything you want.

#### Rule 3: Create flexible solutions

Don’t do anything twice if you don’t have to. See if a generic solution
is just as easy as a specific one. Want to build prerequisite skills for
using certain items into your character databases? What about
prerequisite races, alignments, et cetera? You could come up with a far
more flexible tagging system to integrate that required (or banned)
characters with certain tags for everything from race to political
allegiances—and you went from creating a one-off solution to a powerful,
useful tool for managing the game.

#### Rule 4: Use computers and people for what they are good at

Computers are good at storing and processing information. They are good
at following large amounts of preset rules quickly. This covers a lot of
rules systems in the LARP hobby, especially the parts that aren’t very
much fun. When possible, leverage computers to take crunching numbers or
looking up things out of the hands of a person.

Humans are extremely good at weighing their chances and making
decisions. Use computers to put decisions into the hands of the player,
not take them away. The best dynamic is often that the computer presents
available choices and limitations, which the human decides upon and the
computer executes.

### Strategies and Approaches

Most approaches to using technology in LARP fit into a few categories,
requiring differing levels of commitment and time on the part of the
developer. With overviews and examples, I hope to give you some ideas on
what can be integrated into your game, or in a game you play.

#### Within the Game

Computers and mobile technology are integrating themselves into actual
LARP gameplay in a variety of ways, and they can be great additions as
both centerpieces and helpers. There are many ways they can be
integrated into your game, with varying degrees of complexity.

#### The Pure Prop

The simplest and easiest to integrate is the pure prop. Little more than
a looping animation on a screen or on a phone, these are often
remarkably effective additions to any costume or scene for science
fiction, cyberpunk, or related LARPs. Most app stores feature
“scientific scanner” gag apps. A more ambitious player or staff member
can use game engines such as Unity to set up a looping animation with
some simple reactive buttons that do nothing other than cause a visual
effect.

Magical effects can also be created using mobile technology with some
set dressing. Particularly useful is an old magician’s trick called
Pepper’s Ghost. You’ve likely seen this before—a ghostly translucent
apparition floats due to being a projection being reflected against a
piece of shiny glass. This effect makes it easy to create “holograms” or
floating glowing shapes as magical effects.

#### Manually Controlled Effects

<img class="text-clip harnessing-the-glowing-rectangle-circuit" src="/vol1/images/harnessing-the-glowing-rectangle-circuit.png" />
Pay no attention to the man behind the curtain. Some games effectively
use technology but have a staff member running the show and controlling
the technology at all times. This is often a trick using an
off-the-shelf piece of technology.

In a Call of Cthulhu game I played many years ago, the “command line”
for a computer was actually an IRC chat room. The computer’s responses
were provided by a staff member in the other room. A simple ‘trick’ but
an effective one, since it allowed the players to interact with a
fictional computer system, but it still required a staff member’s
attention.

The Czech LARP Shards (Vano et al) has a wonderful example of a manual
solution giving a incredible digital effect. A post-apocalyptic sci-fi
game, it featured conversations with NPCs via a communications
viewscreen prop made out of a projector. These communications were
handled elsewhere on the site, via a live video feed from a camera and
makeshift studio.

These are great solutions, though they require a great deal of time and
organizer support. But they can make for a very enjoyable experience.

#### Single Purpose Programs

Now, we take the first step toward fully automated computer-augmented
LARPing. It is extremely easy to utilize mobile computing and other
technology to create single-purpose obstacles, puzzles, or information
sources for a particular plot. If the players need to hack an ancient
pre-war computer or bypass a complex computerized bomb timer, you can
use technology to make a completely in-game experience that does not
break immersion. Computers are also great locking up information—a
computer that only gives you information if you have the right passkey,
for instance.

There are two ways to approach this—repurpose other apps to stand-in, or
make a custom program.

Don’t be afraid to repurpose existing games and software. Mobile games
come in many varieties, and free simple puzzle games abound. In
Planetfall, in-game scientists were scrambling to analyze an alien
virus, and we wanted to make a game be the mechanic for doing the
analysis. We attempted to create a custom program, but given time
limitations, we instead found a 3D puzzle game for free that had a
suitable sci-fi looking interface. The players still loved the struggle
and experience, and only had to be given a note that they should contact
the staff once they had completed the puzzle.

Building a custom program is more time-consuming but allows for you to
control the entire experience. With limited programming experience and
an off-the-shelf game engine, simple interfaces and basic games can be
created. Generally, the more simple the interface, the more you should
consider creating a custom program. A simple keypad puzzle can be made
in minutes. An engaging DNA analysis minigame might be too ambitious.

#### Smoke and Mirrors

One step beyond the one-shot puzzle, you can create interesting effects
by *faking* a fully functional program quite often. Coupled with good
art and design, very shallow solutions can be very effective. The
computer interface might be little more than a web page or a Flash
animation.

For example, the Czech LARP Shards (Vano et al) featured a mechanic
around manipulating and discovering resources via a satellite network.
They created a basic interface via a web page, styled as a futuristic
control system, overseeing hundreds of satellites. However, it was
simply a web page with a great many buttons that displayed information
if you clicked on a “sector” to scan. The sheer volume made hints as to
what sectors to scan valuable in game, but the actual technology was
ridiculously simple.

Especially for short-run and one-shot games, these solutions are
perfect. They don’t require any risky programming, use well-established
technology and yet given a fully-automated interactive experience for
the player. But the kinds of mechanics and puzzles they can implement
are limited.

#### Taking Over Systems

One of the most time-intensive but rewarding applications of technology
to a game is when you hand over entire areas of mechanics to software.
But, this requires dedicated developers offering their time and
expertise to the game.

The American science fiction LARP Spite (Northwest Roleplaying Games)
utilizes a web interface to handle money transfers and hacking in-game.
These hacking mechanics form a core part of their gameplay, and are a
completely self-running part.

That’s perhaps the most powerful aspect of these fully-integrated
systems, that they minimize organizer involvement, yet are guaranteed to
behave exactly as they are intended. Automating gameplay is an extremely
powerful way of creating interesting gameplay and complex interactions
while lessening staffing requirements.

#### Fully Augmented Gameplay

This is the Holy Grail of LARP and technology—a game which is run almost
entirely via smartphones, tablets, and computers. Many experiments are
currently underway, but in my opinion, the most we will see in the near
future is games which *mostly* run on computers.

My game Planetfall is taking steps toward this, integrating a custom
mobile app which handles almost all of our core mechanics, from healing
wounded characters to analyzing strange alien lifeforms. Most of the
interaction takes place through QR codes attached to props or scattered
around the site, allowing the players to scan, get customized
information and interact with the game world without staff involvement.

I cannot overstate how time-consuming this approach is. The Planetfall
app took roughly half a year of dedicated development before the first
game, with a lot of learning experiences along the way. Also, equipment
requirements are a concern—requiring every player to have a smart device
poses a barrier to entry, but one that is getting lesser and lesser as
time goes on.

### What about digital combat?

The use of computers to handle LARP combat is a very difficult
problem—and the technology simply is not there yet. Some companies have
begun to develop LARP-like electronic games. Sabertron was a popular
Kickstarter for electronic boffers that would record hits; and companies
such as LyteShot are creating Bluetooth enabled beam guns for virtual
combat.

However, these technologies are not ready for competitive play yet.
Sabertron is easily spoofed and cannot handle more than one-on-one
combat, and existing laser tag systems have limited range and
capabilities, especially in daylight. Real-time simulated combat of the
accuracy and fairness that players would want is currently the province
of high-end military and police training systems. Expensive systems such
as MILES (Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System) represent the
state of the art. One player’s equipment can cost thousands and the
manufacturers of such systems are focused on government customers, not
commercial products.

Will LARP combat one day be handled by computer? Maybe. But not any time
soon, though I hope I am proven wrong.

### Management Software and Databases

This is likely the most pervasive and oldest form of computers being
leveraged in LARP, and is so ubiquitous, I won’t spend much time on it
here. I first encountered a full-featured LARP management solution as
early as 2000, with the World of Darkness desktop application Grapevine
(http://grapevinelarp.com/). But even before then, spreadsheets and
database applications have been part of the LARP runner’s toolkit for
most of the life of the hobby.

More and more, these databases are moving online. Attempts are being
made to make a ‘generic’ online LARP database that is customizable and
usable for most games. But they suffer from the limitation of how
‘generic’ they can really be. For example, Larpwriter
(http://www.larpwriter.com/) focuses on story games and one shots; but
would be of less use to a large campaign game.

Some games simply make use of shared online spreadsheets to track
characters, but more and more games are using custom-made databases and
web-based submission forms to handle character submission and approval,
but a truly generic but LARP-focused solution has not presented itself.
Maybe it will soon, but these custom databases are a well-established
part of the LARP manager’s world; if that is the limit of how you want
use technology, get a talented web programmer and a database then have
at it.

### Character Creation

While many games will allow characters to be submitted through websites,
it is rarer to find one where the character creation process itself is
automated. Usually, the character is entered by hand after being made
with written rules; the final math and approval is done by a staff
member.

There’s a simple reason for this—character creation is complicated and
hard to validate in most traditional systems. Keeping track of
prerequisites, available skills, limits placed on a character due to
previous choices, all gets very complicated very quickly. What is easy
to write into a rulebook is hard to “explain” to a computer sometimes.

As a simple example, in your game, you can write the line underneath the
“Great Orc Howl” power that “only orcs may take this power.” You’re
done. You just have to remember that rule when approving characters. But
computer programs are notoriously intolerant of “one of kind” cases. You
would need to start building a system into the character creation
software to check to see if any limits are on a skill, and you need to
start defining those limits in a fashion the computer can interpret and
you can update as you see fit.

Now, you must add a special command for whenever the computer adds a
skill to a character sheet to check for the prerequisite trait (“being
an orc”) and you must also have a way to outline those prerequisites and
read them. Oh, and if the player changes their mind and changes their
race, you either have to drop all skills and force them back a step…or
write a function to drop all the racially specific skills.

And that’s just for one particular type of character creation rule.
Don’t despair, though, this approach is very powerful but it is time
consuming to write and each new type of limitation you want to add for
the system will require some work.

If you are designing a LARP from scratch and you know this is how you
want your character creation to work, you can design *around* the use of
computers instead of trying to make the computers interpret and work
around traditional character creation—and do things that are onerous or
impossible with a book-based creation system.

When I was creating Planetfall, I was able to create a complex life path
system, where players created their character’s biography through
character creation. They spent points on each step of the way on skills
based on their choices for their character’s history. There are even
secret life path steps that can only be revealed through specific
combinations of skill spends and life choices. In a book form, outlining
over a hundred different life steps would be tedious. But since I made
the system for online character creation only, the computer knew what
choices to reveal and what skills to make available. This is because
sorting through large amounts of information based on criteria is
something computers are really good at.

### Online Action

Some games, such as my own Planetfall LARP, have moved to even more
ambitious online enhancements. While between-game role play in forums,
chat rooms, and email are a decades-old staple of LARP, some have moved
to make the time between games into an online gaming experience in and
of itself.

Campaign games often allow between-game actions, but with some work and
the implementation of an online system, this process can be completely
streamlined for both the player and the game owner. Players can be
engaged in predetermined downtime activities and served information
based on their traits—their faction, their skills, or whatever else you
can imagine.

Done well, this can make a campaign game more engaging and also easier
to play. Your game can be accompanied by a miniature online multiplayer
game that can engage players while also lessening the need for valuable
staff time.

### Conclusion

Marc Andreesen has famously said, “software is eating the world,” and
those teeth are finally beginning to find live action gaming. As we move
forward as designers and organizers, it is tempting to see software as
the magic solution to many problems. And it is a powerful solution to
many problems.

But I hope this article helps both creators and players understand what
goes into the process, its limitations and its possibilities. It is a
very exciting time as virtual reality, augmented reality and live action
converge, allowing for new forms. But we must take care to do it right,
and I hope my experiences and insights into the growing use of
technology helps clear the way for you to choose how to integrate
technology into your game.

You can learn more about my own technology-enhanced game at
http://www.prepareforplanetfall.com.

### Bibliography

Planetfall LARP. 2016. “Planetfall”.
http://www.prepareforplanetfall.com/.

Spite LARP. 2016. “Spite LARP”. http://spitelarp.com/.

Larpwriter. 2016. “Larpwriter”. http://larpwriter.com/.

Grapevine LARP Management Software. 2016. “Grapevine”.
http://grapevinelarp.com/

Andreessen, Marc. “Why Software Is Eating The World.” WSJ. Wall Street
Journal, 20 Aug. 2011. Web. 27 Jan. 2016.

<hr/>

*Matthew Webb is the creator of Planetfall and owner of its production
company, Incognita Limited. He began LARPing when he was 17 years old
with Call of Cthulhu Live. He is a professional software engineer,
working with the Department of Defense developing applications to
support military training exercises and education. He frequently applies
some of his knowledge from live action role-playing and gaming to his
professional field. A native of Austin, he lives there with his
wonderful domestic partner Stephanie, her daughter Belinda, and two
black cats.*