---
layout: vol1
content_type: text/html
title: "Mytharc"
columns: false
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Mytharc</h2>
    A Narrative-focused LARP Methodology
  </div>
  by Caroline Murphy
</header>

Mytharc is a methodology and supporting system intended for game-runners
that would like to focus on creating narrative-driven live action games.

My decision to create Mytharc came out of a general feeling of
dissatisfaction with available systems to both handle narrative
progression as well as elegantly handle conflict and combat resolution.
It is my feeling that systems should be employed when they support or
reinforce the themes of a game, but that many systems over-complicate a
creator's intention. Mytharc is an attempt to create navigable systems
that are lightweight enough to support story without becoming the focus
of the story. The goal is to focus both game creators as well as players
on how they can collaborate to create meaningful, enriching stories
together.

This document is divided up into a few distinct parts.

The methodology explains the thought process behind system choices; the
safety section sets out some expectations to create a fun and safe
environment; and the system section lays out rules to support the
framework in order to encourage collaborative, story-driven games.

Mytharc is heavily inspired by Nordic LARP[^1] tradition and the FATE
RPG[^2] system, taking the tack that great characters and stories are
not defined by their stats or abilities, but by their choices and
interactions. At the same time, Mytharc takes into consideration some
traditions from more well-known LARP systems such as Accelerant[^3] and
Cthulhu Live[^4].

Mytharc is setting-less, and is intended to be flexible enough that any
setting desired can be created and applied to the system. In general,
Mytharc's systems support the type of game that is more gritty and
deadly than epic and dashing, but the system could be reasonably tweaked
to support either.

Mytharc is not intended to be the "right" way to run games- many games
are perfectly suited with other systems. Mytharc is focused primarily on
collaborative narrative, and secondarily on simulation, and in any case
where the two clash, Mytharc takes the position that the story should
drive the outcome.

### Table of Contents

* [Methodology](#methodology)
  * [Play To Lose](#play-to-lose)
  * [Equality in Design](#equality-in-design)
  * [The Journey](#the-journey)
  * [Constructivist Pedagogy](#constructivist-pedagogy)
* [Safety](#safety)
  * [Physical Safety](#physical-safety)
  * [Emotional Safety](#emotional-safety)
  * [Simulated Intimacy](#simulated-intimacy)
  * [The Meta Room](#the-meta-room)
* [System](#system)
  * [Character Creation](#character-creation)
    * [Attributes](#attributes)
    * [Skills](#skills)
      * [Mental Skills](#mental-skills)
        * [Knowledge Based Skills](#knowledge-based-skills)
        * [Special Mental Skills](#special-mental-abilities)
      * [Physical Skills](#physical-skills)
    * [Arms & Armor](#arms-armor)
    * [Items](#items)
  * [Progression](#progression)
    * [Discovery of the World - The "Experience" System](#discovery-of-the-world---the-experience-system)
    * [Discovery of the Self- The "Red Token" System](#h.64q9rzl8y699)
  * [Combat & Conflict](#combat-conflict)
    * [Physical Combat Resolution versus Conflict Resolution](#physical-combat-resolution-versus-conflict-resolution)
      * [Boffer Combat](#boffer-combat)
      * [Dueling](#dueling)
    * [Physical Healing](#physical-healing)
    * [Physical Impairment](#physical-impairment)
    * [Mental Taxation/Stress](#mental-taxationstress)
    * [Mental Healing](#mental-healing)
    * [Mental Impairment](#mental-impairment)
    * [Death & Exit](#death-exit)

<a name="methodology"></a>
### Methodology

Core components of a Mytharc game:

* Players "play to lose."
* Equality in Design: Abilities are not tied to race, gender, orientation, beliefs, etc. Equality and uniqueness are not mutually exclusive.
* The Journey: Players are the protagonists; their choices impact the world and themselves. Narrative arcs are the driving force behind choices. Completion of arcs and stories is heavily encouraged.
* Constructivist Pedagogy: Connections to others, sharing, and self discovery through experiences are the driving forces behind growing in knowledge. Knowledge is power; power can be lost.

<a name="play-to-lose"></a>
#### Play to Lose

Players in a Mytharc game are expected to "play to lose." This does not
mean that a character can never win or succeed, but rather that players
are aiming for the type of story that includes failure and subsequent
growth from that failure. Playing to lose is about being generous with
your roleplay, it's about yielding the scene to someone that will get
more benefit from it than you, and it's about taking a dive in a battle
so that others are included in the story. When you play to lose, you
allow your character to experience failure and loss. The point of
play-to-lose is to create dramatic, interesting dynamics, and encourage
collaborative play.

<a name="equality-in-design"></a>
#### Equality in Design

One of the core tenants in a Mytharc game is that all people are
created, at their very centers, to be equal. Similarly, every person is
unique and special. It is not their race or socioeconomic status that
makes them unique, but their own personal journeys, and therefore, their
personalities. As such, Mytharc does not use any traits based on race,
class, gender, orientation, or beliefs.

While all people are equal, our environments are influential to our
perspectives, and as such the concept of cultures is important.
Knowledge of certain cultural or group-associated aspects can be
represented through taking skills favored by those groups, but again,
are not restricted as long as the appropriate context for knowing them
exists. Certain cultures may have knowledge that tends to be known among
all their members, but others are not precluded from a similar
understanding, so long as they put in the work needed to learn that
knowledge.

In a Mytharc game, all players can start with the same base skills.
These skills should fit a character's background and story. Specialized
skills can be unlocked through many different means, and players can be
creative about how they approach this. A game creator can decide what
skills are open, and what are restricted or hidden.

Similarly, each person is unique and has something special that helps
make them who they are. This is represented in Mytharc by the "True
Self" ability, which is a special ability unique to an individual, but
can be learned by others with the aide of the individual. This system is
further explained in the later part of this methodology.

<a name="the-journey"></a>
### The Journey

Stories are how we create meaning from experience, and Mytharc seeks to
create meaning from a player's experience, both personally as well as
within their greater community. In Mytharc, players are the
protagonists; their choices impact the world and should drive the
narrative just as much as the vision of the Game Creators. Completion of
arcs and stories is heavily encouraged via use of the character
progression mechanics (see the Experience and Red Token system), as well
as the fact that death and character exit are built into the system in a
way that is meant to encourage a story full of growth, change, failure
and triumph, love and loss.

<a name="constructivist-pedagogy"></a>
### Constructivist Pedagogy

Understanding, whether initial or deeper, can only be developed by
sharing knowledge. Central to the concept of the Mytharc story is the
notion that people can only understand the meaning behind things when
they are able to share with others and learn from the multitudes of
perspectives. By teaching and sharing, we grow, and can only further our
own development by including others. This is represented in a Mytharc
game by the fact that no single character can advance along a knowledge
path past a certain point unless there are others sharing in that
knowledge with whom they can speak and share. The more who share in the
knowledge, the greater the ability for progress.

<a name="safety"></a>
### Safety

<a name="physical-safety"></a>
#### Physical Safety

There are two words used for physical safety in a number of LARP
traditions, Mytharc included, that are recommended for running games of
any type. These words are "Caution" and "Emergency."

**"Caution"** - this is a warning that a player is about to be in
physical danger. The statement following should describe that danger
clearly.

**"Emergency"** - there is a medical or physical emergency. Game ceases
entirely until the situation is resolved.

<a name="emotional-safety"></a>
#### Emotional Safety[^5]

There are two words used for emotional safety in some LARP traditions
that are recommended in a heavily narrative game like Mytharc. These
words are "Brake" and "Cut."

"**Brake**" - this is a warning, this player is feeling uncomfortable
out-of-character and the scene can continue at that same level of
intensity, but no further. The player does not need to explain
themselves afterwards. If in a situation where the player cannot speak,
they can double tap (tap twice on any surface) for a brake.

"**Cut**" - this player is feeling overwhelmed; the scene ends, no
questions asked. In a situation where a player cannot speak, they can
triple tap for a cut.

<a name="simulated-intimacy"></a>
#### Simulated Intimacy

When we develop our connections to others, we often grow as people.
Since intimacy can be difficult to simulate in a game, players are
encouraged to participate in whatever context they find most
comfortable. Ars Amandi is a system that uses certain forms of physical
contact to simulate other, more intimate forms of contact. Some players
may wish to participate in Ars Amandi[^6] as an expression of their
character's connection and intimacy to another, but this is by no means
required. Systems for simulating intimacy are opt-in only, and no one
need ever explain any reason why they refuse an exchange.

<a name="the-meta-room"></a>
#### The Meta Room[^7]

Mytharc games have a special place set aside called the Meta Room. This
room is where players may go out of character to be "off screen" while
something would be happening in the game. The Meta Room can be used for
taking an OOC break to think through something, resolve an OOG
discussion about an IG story, or play out a symbolic version of
something happening in game such as a duel or romantic encounter.

#### A Note on Bleed and Debriefs

In games with high emotional content, players can experience what is
known as "Bleed"[^8]. This is when the emotions of their characters are
so strong that they are carried back to the player and impacts them in
an out-of-game way, or vise versa. Bleed is often the goal of a very
emotional story, and it can be very positive to experience. By the same
token, experiencing too much bleed can be a negative experience for some
people.

Mitigating the negative effects of bleed is important, and after-game
debriefs[^9] can be a great way to handle this. This can take a few
different forms, and Game Creators are encouraged to use whatever form
best suits their style of game.

<a name="system"></a>
### System

<a name="character-creation"></a>
#### Character Creation

Characters in a Mytharc game are created as follows:

1. Picking a character's culture
2. Deciding upon their personal beliefs and writing their corresponding history
3. Deciding attributes and skills
4. Gaining a unique ability based on a character's history and experiences
5. Other details - outfit, etc.

##### Culture

Everyone comes from somewhere, and our places of origin can have a great
influence over the way we see the world. Mytharc encourages Game
Creators to make up worlds that have elaborate economic, ideological,
and social climates, and allow your players to choose whatever cultural
background is appealing to them from a story perspective.

Game Creators are encouraged to think about areas of knowledge that
might be special to or preferred by a culture, and note what they are
and their reasoning in writeups about the cultures. Players are not
required to incorporate those into their character, but should also have
a sound reasoning for why they would not.

##### Personal Beliefs

Everyone believes in something. Whether that belief is in a military
industrial scientific society or a spiritual path makes no difference in
the Mytharc system - belief systems make up the core of how people
interact with one another. Discovering your character's own personal
belief system is key to their growth and development. Like in our own
lives, these beliefs can change and grow over time, and no one idea is
more "correct" or "true" than another. Mytharc's character creation
process encourages players to develop out these ideas about their
character, but does not represent these in any way on a character sheet
or via skills.

##### Attributes and Skills

Attributes are meant to represent a person's actual physical and mental
being, and help to arbitrate things like when a person is injured or
exhausted, etc.

Skills are meant to represent the things that a person does or knows.
Everyone has talents and crafts that they may cultivate over their
lifetime. Mytharc encourages social skills to be represented and
generated via interpersonal roleplaying (and social skills are not
represented on a character sheet), while knowledge skills and physical
skills can be represented on a character sheet and have corresponding
in-game mechanics to support these aspects of roleplay.

##### True Self

In order to represent the special unique qualities of an individual,
every character has a special skill that is linked uniquely to them.
Game Creators are encouraged to create skills that fit a character's
background and story while adding balance and intrigue to their game
world.

This special skill can be called anything a Game Creator wishes (in case
they want to build in a narrative surrounding it such as super powers),
but for ease of reference will be called a *"True Self"* in this
documentation. A character may use their True Self skill once per day.
If a character so wishes, they may, when they have a deep interpersonal
connection to another character, allow them to access this skill by
*bestowing* it upon them. If another character uses the skill, they must
tell the person with whom they share it, and that person may not use it
for that day. The intention behind this was to reflect that you would
only share your True Self with someone whom you loved and trusted
deeply; someone who would not misuse your trust or use it carelessly.
Once you have shared this part of yourself with someone, it cannot be
unlearned, even if the relationship sours. Learning someone's True Self
and sharing yours also gives you a [*Red Token*](#id.4mhryvc0vepi).

<a name="attributes"></a>
#### Attributes

In a Mytharc game, attributes are simply Body and Mind. This represents
the amount of stress that your physical body or your mind can take
before you need to rest or be restored in some way. All characters get
10 points to distribute in either category, which serve as their base.
These points can be temporarily diminished and restored over the course
of an event by physical injury, taxing mental problems, etc, but will
always return to their base scores with time and rest. These attributes
usually will not change through the course of a character's life. There
may be exceptions; extreme situations in which one point of either Body
or Mind might be permanently lost for narrative reasons.

A game cycle can be as much as once per hour, or once per battle, once
per day, once per meal, once per event, once per season - depending on
the Game Creator's preference. The Game Creator can determine what
constitutes "rest" enough to gain back attributes. Further, Mind and
Body could refresh at different rates, depending on the kind of game
that the Game Creator wants to run. For example, a high magic, high
fantasy game might have Mind refresh every few hours, but Body refresh
only once an event. An esoteric horror game might have mind refresh once
per season, and body refresh once per event. Anything appropriate to the
game creator's world is encouraged.

<a name="skills"></a>
#### Skills

In a Mytharc game, there are two types of skills - Mental skills and
Physical skills.

It is worth noting that there are no skills to represent the ability to
handle weapons or armor in a Mytharc game. This reflects a fundamental
design philosophy of Mytharc; anyone may pick up any weapon at any time
and use it, and that using it effectively is simply a matter of
knowledge, time and energy invested. The knowledge of using a weapon can
easily be reflected in a knowledge based skill, and would create the
ability for a character to then invest the time and physical training
into a physical based skill. Similarly, anyone may wear as much or as
little armor as they like, and expect it to protect their body
accordingly.

For example, in a Star Trek game, there may be a secret call known only
to those who understand "Vulcan Martial Arts" that allows them to put an
opponent to sleep with a single touch. After learning the appropriate
Knowledge skill, the Physical skill "Sleep" then becomes available for
investment.

<a name="mental-skills"></a>
#### Mental Skills

There are two categories of mental skills in a Mytharc game. One is
Knowledge, which comprises the vast bulk of what can should be invested
in. The other is Special Mental Abilities that equate to things like
powers and spells. These are unlocked through knowledges much the same
way that restricted Physical skills are, but draw from the Mind pool to
enact, as opposed to requiring further skill point or experience
investment. This is because, as a mental skill, by investing the time
into the knowledge, it has already been learned, as opposed to a
physical discipline that takes time and practice in addition to
knowledge.

<a name="knowledge-based-skills"></a>
##### Knowledge Based Skills

In a Mytharc game, knowledge is the basis for much of the story.
Characters engage in soft skill-checks based on their knowledges at
almost every turn. What they know defines how they interact with their
environment and others, and open the door for many creative
possibilities, both created by Game Creator, as well as driven by the
player.

Knowledge skills are meant to be a general area of knowledge, which
allow for a diversity of specialization under those categories. For
example, say a character wanted to be a masterful cook, they might find
themselves with a basic education of "Services", and a highly
specialized education in "Culinary Arts" - or perhaps alternately an
education in "Arts" and a specialization in "Cooking".

At character creation, a character starts with Knowledge-Based Skill
points equal to that character's Mind score multiplied by 3. The reason
why knowledge is so much more abundant at creation than physical skills
is because in Mytharc, what you know is far more powerful than what your
body can do. Any unused points may be banked (in the category) and used
later when characters gain experience.

The cost for a skill is 1 point for the core skill, and specializations
cannot be purchased without the core skill being taken. Cost for
specializations are 1 point for a the first level, 2 points for a second
level, and so forth. Specializations may grow to 3x with a lone player's
investment, and up to 5 using shared learning (see Constructive Pedagogy
explanation). A game creator can decide how many individuals must be
studying together in order to open the following level, and they can be
PC or NPC, Mytharc recommends three and five, for the 4th and 5th tiers,
respectively.

This list of skills is co-opted from a list of higher education majors,
and is highly mutable.

<div class="content-container columns">
  <ul>
    <li>Agriculture                          </li>
    <li>Arts                                 </li>
    <li>Biology                              </li>
    <li>Business                             </li>
    <li>Communications                       </li>
    <li>Computer/Information Science         </li>
    <li>Education                            </li>
    <li>Engineering                          </li>
    <li>Environmental Science                </li>
    <li>Health Care                          </li>
    <li>Languages                            </li>
    <li>Literature                           </li>
    <li>Law                                  </li>
    <li>Mathematics/Statistics               </li>
    <li>Mechanics                            </li>
    <li>Military Science/Protective Services </li>
    <li>Philosophy &amp; Religion            </li>
    <li>Physical Sciences                    </li>
    <li>Protective Services                  </li>
    <li>Psychology &amp; Counseling          </li>
    <li>Recreation &amp; Fitness             </li>
    <li>Services                             </li>
    <li>Skilled Trades and Construction      </li>
    <li>Social Sciences &amp; Liberal Arts   </li>
    <li>Social Services                      </li>
    <li>Transportation                       </li>
  </ul>
</div>

It is incumbent on Game Creators to create a list of skills (and
specializations) that will be relevant to the game they are creating,
and to react to the kinds of skills that characters in their game take
by creating opportunities for those skills to be useful in their game
world where possible. Different skills can be created at a Game
Creator's discretion, and creating hidden knowledge skills that can only
be discovered as a character grows is highly encouraged. Examples might
be an ancient language unknown to most, or the business dealings of a
secret society. Players and Game Creator's should keep an open dialogue
about a character's goals and interests, and react accordingly, keeping
in mind that points on a sheet do not equal a great character.

<a name="special-mental-abilities"></a>
##### Special Mental Abilities

It is also possible for knowledge to unlock mentally-based powers,
especially in systems that utilize magic or science-fiction technology.
Game Creators may create appropriate systems for these based on their
setting that draw from a character's temporary Mind pool.

An example of this might be in a esoteric horror game, learning a dark
and dangerous spell to summon an impish creature to do one's bidding.
Learning the spell would require a specialized Knowledge, perhaps a deep
understanding of the Occult. Enacting the spell would require spending
Mind. The spell itself could be learned by anyone who put the time into
learning it, given an appropriate reason for doing so.

<a name="physical-skills"></a>
##### Physical Skills

In a live action game, people often would like to represent their
characters as having a different set of physical attributes or
limitations than they themselves have. It is important to take that into
account in a system. This is handled in many LARP systems with "calls"
or gestures that represent these abilities or limitations. Game
Creator's are welcome to use whatever calls or gestures they deem
appropriate to their setting. The Mytharc methodology recommends open
calls that are disabling effects that last 3 seconds or are
instantaneous, rather than things that outright end a conflict - for
example a "Trip" versus a "Sleep".

At character creation, a character starts with Physical Skill Points
equal to that character's Body score. Any unused points may be banked
and used later when characters gain experience.

Calls or gestures can be purchased for 1 point for the first level, 2
points for the second level, and so forth, and cannot grow to more than
3x without constructive pedagogy, which allows up to 5. The number of
levels taken is the number of times that the call or gesture can be used
in a cycle. The cycle is determined by the Game Creators (and is
discussed above under Attributes).

Recommended Open calls:

<div class="content-container columns">
  <ul>
    <li>Disarm - Drop a weapon</li>
    <li>Knock Back - Push back 3 steps</li>
    <li>Parry - Negates a call delivered by melee</li>
    <li>Stun - Disorients for 3 seconds</li>
    <li>Trip - Fall to the ground</li>
  </ul>
</div>

Recommended Restricted or Secret that require special knowledge:

<div class="content-container columns">
  <ul>
    <li>Dodge - Instantly negates a call       </li>
    <li>Maim - Breaks a limb                   </li>
    <li>Sleep - Knocks unconscious for 3 min   </li>
    <li>Tend - Temporarily bandages wounds</li>
    <li>Waylay - Knocks unconscious with melee for 3 min</li>
  </ul>
</div>

<a name="arms-armor"></a>
#### Arms & Armor

Players may outfit a character however they like. The only thing that
determines how armored a character is at any given time is the armor
they are actually wearing at that moment. The reasoning behind why armor
and physical skills are different is that anyone can get armor and come
up with a narrative reason to do so, that is easy - but learning a
physical skill is hard and takes investment of time/energy.

Armor can give up to 5 points of "hits" before it must be repaired or
replaced (repairing should simply be roleplayed accordingly). Game
Creators will look at a character's outfitting and decide how many
points are given-- typically 1-3 is the average. Five points would be
very unusual and be someone in full heavy plate or space marine armor.

Characters may carry whatever weapons they would like to physically
represent, and similarly, should have an understanding for themselves of
where the weapon came from, whether it is special to them, etc.

<a name="items"></a>
#### Items

Game Creators are highly discouraged from creating or giving any items
that have any sort of attribute or skill attached to them that is not
widely and generally accessible by the entire game world. Items in a
Mytharc game might require certain knowledges in order to use
appropriately, or to access, but in general, items should *require*
something from a player, not *bestow* something to a player.

Game Creators can go another step, and make it so that without
Constructivist Pedagogy at work, some items are inaccessible, but
working together, they become available for all. For example, in a game
where bullets are a scarce resource, enough players who invested the
time and energy into Engineering and Manufacturing would be able to
create a means by which everyone could obtain bullets each session.

Mytharc is of the opinion that systems with items that bestow attributes
or skills can lead to item hoarding, negative player-versus-player
interactions, and can create an environment that is destructive to
collaborative narrative storytelling. Similarly, Mytharc does not have
any in-game professions or wealth mechanics. This is so that players may
feel free to roleplay whatever character they feel is the most
interesting to them.

<a name="progression"></a>
### Progression

<a name="discovery-of-the-world---the-experience-system"></a>
#### Discovery of the World - The "Experience" System

Players receive normal experience at a rate of typically 2 experience
points per game event that their character attends. A Game Creator may
have other systems for gaining more experience, such as in-game
discovery, contribution to the community, etc., but that is up to each
Game Creator individually.

Experience is spent to purchase Mental skills and Physical skills, for
the same cost progression that is described at character creation (ie 1
point for first level, 2 for second, etc). Game Creators may wish to
represent experience with a token of some kind, but they can also choose
to not do this.

<a name="h.64q9rzl8y699"></a><a name="id.4mhryvc0vepi"></a>
#### Discovery of the Self - The "Red Token" System

As in our real lives, there are experiences that broaden our
understanding of ourselves at our very core. These are things like love,
loss, accomplishing a major goal, failing at something important, and
more. No one gets through life without experiencing these things, and as
we gain these experiences, our perspectives shift and we are able to
approach things differently.

This is represented in Mytharc games by a system called the "Red Token"
system. When a character experiences a major event, they gain a Red
Token. This Red Token opens up knowledges to them that they could have
never known before (secret paths that are at the Game Creator's
discretion). The Red Token also gives them an advantage in conflicts
(see the dueling system below), as they're more likely to have
experienced similar things in their lives before this.

There are certain events that will automatically mean gaining a Red
Token, such as those described in the Death & Exit, and the True Self
mechanics. Game Creators should also feel free to create a manifold of
narrative means by which a character can have this happen. This can also
be a collaboration between player and Game Creator.

As the character's story goes on, and they accumulate Red Tokens, their
narrative arc unfolds, and their self discovery finally comes to a point
where the arc is over. After a number of Red Tokens decided upon by the
Game Creators (Mytharc recommends 5) are gained, the character's arc is
completed. The player then works with the Game Creators to end the
character's story, whether by that character's death, retirement, or
other exit.

<a name="combat-conflict"></a>
### Combat & Conflict

<a name="physical-combat-resolution-versus-conflict-resolution"></a>
#### Physical Combat Resolution versus Conflict Resolution

One of the most fun parts of a live action game can be the rush of a
battle. In a Mytharc game, battles can be extremely deadly. For this
reason, Mytharc supports two different systems of play - combat
resolution as well as conflict resolution. Combat resolution is
represented by boffer combat, and conflict resolution is represented by
the dueling system.

<a name="boffer-combat"></a>
#### Boffer Combat

In a Mytharc game, real-time combat is represented by latex weapons,
boffer weapons, dart guns, or other weapons at the Game Creator's
discretion. There is no called damage in a Mytharc game; each hit
represents a wound which temporarily lowers a character's Body. Some
Game Creators may wish to have weapons of certain types do more damage;
they can adjust accordingly, but but in the standard Mytharc design
philosophy, access to those weapons should be accessible via many
different means and not closed off to someone thinking creatively (see
above section on items for explanation of this reasoning).

When Body is at 0, a character falls unconscious. They will awaken in 3
minutes unless bandaged and cared for by whatever means appropriate to
the setting, which can shorten that time. A character will not die
unless they are death struck (see below on Death & Exit for an
explanation of death strikes).

<a name="dueling"></a>
#### Dueling

A duel may be requested at anytime between a player and an NPC or
another player. Game Creators are encouraged to come up with a phrase
that is recognizable as an invitation to engage in a duel that a
character can accept or reject, such as "It seems as though we cannot
settle our differences with words."

If accepted, both parties will exit the scene and meet in the Meta Room.
There they will quickly talk out of game and decide the outcome of the
duel. This is the preferred way of resolving a conflict, and can lead to
fun dramatic interactions on both sides at no major risk to the parties
involved.

If no agreement can be made, each party must bid experience (or skills
points if no experience has been gained/spent) or Red Tokens, in secret.
Game Creators should have appropriate dice set aside in their Meta Room.

* 1 Experience/1 Skill Point - Give 1 d2
* Red Tokens - Give 1 d6

Any Experience that is bid is lost, regardless of the outcome, and
players must adjust their builds accordingly. Any Red Token bid will
create a permanent Impairment, but Red Tokens are never lost. This
represents the fact that in a conflict of this type, people are injured
and will experience loss, and is meant to encourage people to
collaboratively come up with interesting scenes without the use of
mechanics (remember-- Play to Lose!). A player's willingness to
sacrifice may make the difference between their loss or victory, and
when things like their life are on the line, the sacrifice may be well
worth it.

Each party rolls their bid, and adds up the total. The party with the
higher roll wins the Duel. They now exit the Meta Room and act out a
dramatic fight, predetermined by the previous rolls.

<a name="physical-healing"></a>
#### Physical Healing

Physical healing of all types (even magical in nature) only grants
temporary Body, which expires in 1 hour (or other time period Game
Creator deems appropriate). This temporary Body cannot exceed the
player's maximum Body. After the expiration, if the player is at zero
Body, they must take a temporary impairment. Impairments can include a
broken limb, or temporary loss of a physical skill (Disarm, Trip). They
must roleplay this impairment for the remainder of the cycle.

The only way to heal permanently is to rest, or extraordinary
extenuating circumstances, at a Game Creator's narrative discretion.
Rest can be at a Game Creator's discretion as is appropriate for their
setting, but Mytharc recommends a full night's sleep at minimum.

<a name="physical-impairment"></a>
#### Physical Impairment

Impairments can be temporary or permanent. Temporary impairments should
be player arbitrated-- if a character has gotten into such grievous
physical situations that they are beaten bloody, this should be
roleplayed accordingly.

Putting one's life in extreme danger can cause physical impairments that
are permanent. These situations can arise narratively, as presented by a
Game Creator, or may also happen with specific mechanics in place like
Dueling and Death. The Impairment can be anything from roleplayed
injuries (e.g. the character walks with a limp, the character has a
nasty scar across their face) to loss of physical skills (e.g. the
character loses the ability to disarm others forever). Whatever the
impairment, it should be interesting, befitting the situation that
caused it, and add to a character's story. Permanent impairments can be
a collaboration between Game Creator and player.

<a name="mental-taxation-stress"></a>
#### Mental Taxation/Stress

Game Creators may wish to create systems that require mental exertion in
order to complete, such as magic systems, superpowers, mentally taxing
scenarios, or something else.

Game Creators can create whatever system they choose, and use the Mind
attribute as the pool from which people can draw for these systems.

<a name="mental-healing"></a>
#### Mental Healing

Mental healing of all types (even magical in nature) only grants
temporary Mind, which expires in 1 hour (or time period deemed
appropriate by the Game Creators). This temporary Mind cannot exceed the
players max Mind. After the expiration, if the player is at zero Mind,
they must take a temporary mental impairment.

The only way to mentally heal permanently is to rest, or extraordinary
extenuating circumstances, at a Game Creator's narrative discretion.

<a name="mental-impairment"></a>
### Mental Impairment

When a person becomes mentally exhausted, they can become impaired.

Impairments can be temporary or permanent. Temporary impairments should
be player arbitrated - if a character has exhausted themselves mentally
so completely that they are barely able to function, this should be
roleplayed accordingly. Players are cautioned to think about this as a
mental exhaustion or stress, not as a mental disability or mental health
issue, and to be sensitive about their choices.

Other situations can cause extreme mental stress, which are permanent.
These situations can arise narratively, as presented by a Game Creator,
or may also happen with specific mechanics in place like Dueling and
Death. The Impairment can be anything from roleplayed post traumatic
stress, to the loss of permanent knowledge or mental-based skills.
Whatever the impairment, it should be interesting, befitting the
situation that caused it, and add to a character's story. Permanent
impairments can be a collaboration between Game Creator and player.

<a name="death-exit"></a>
#### Death & Exit

Death in a Mytharc game represents the end of a character's arc.
Characters can also complete their arcs in other ways, and choose to
retire or exit the character in a manner suitable to them.

Because of the extreme focus on narrative, being death struck in Mytharc
is very dramatic, and far more rare than in many other LARP systems.
Being death struck results in an immediate Red Token, and causes a
permanent Physical Impairment. If a character is death struck and they
already have the max number of Red Tokens, they are killed permanently.
If they are not at their maximum number of Red Tokens, roleplay for
repairing the critically wounded character should be undertaken in a
manner appropriate with the game setting.

A death strike in a Mytharc game is as simple as walking to a beaten
opponent (who is at 0 Body), and calling "Death" while ending their life
in some setting appropriate means. Killing someone gives a character an
immediate Red Token, and causes a permanent Mental Impairment.

[^1]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Nordic_Larp
[^2]: http://www.faterpg.com/
[^3]: http://www.accelerantgames.com/
[^4]: http://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/56207/Cthulhu-Live-3rd-Edition-LARP
[^5]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Safewords
[^6]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Ars_Amandi
[^7]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Meta_Room
[^8]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Bleed
[^9]: http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Debriefing
