---
layout: vol1
content_type: text/html
title: "Secrecy in Intercon-Style LARP"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Secrecy in Intercon-Style LARP</h2>
  </div>
  by Brian Richburg
</header>

Every LARP community has unspoken assumptions about LARP, whether
they’re about some element of LARP design or what the ultimate goals of
LARP are. People whose LARP experiences come from a single community are
often unaware of these assumptions, which they tend to take for granted.
Talking about these assumptions explicitly is important both for making
your community open to players from other LARP communities and enabling
experimentation with new forms.

In the [Intercon](http://interactiveliterature.org/P/) community, one of these assumptions is the
importance of secrets and hidden information to our game design.
Intercon-style[^1] games usually contain numerous secrets and surprises
which are pre-written into the game materials and revealed by either the
players or the GM(s) over the course of gameplay. While these secrets
are central to many Intercon-style games from both a gameplay and
narrative standpoint, we tend to take their presence for granted rather
than seeing it as a design choice. In this article, I’ll be talking
about the importance of secrets and hidden information in Intercon-style
LARP—where it comes from, how it has influenced our LARP culture, and
the effects it has on how we write and discuss theater-style LARP in the
Northeast.

### What do I mean by secrecy? How does it underlie our games?

When I talk about the unique way in which secrets are important to this
style of LARP, I am talking specifically about secrets that are
pre-written into the character sheets or other game materials. Many
other LARP writing traditions have ways of providing surprises that do
not stem from pre-written materials in this way, such as by encouraging
players to invent their own character secrets, either individually
before the game or in pre-game workshops.

<img class="text-clip secrecy-in-intercon-style-larp-envelope" src="/vol1/images/secrecy-in-intercon-style-larp-envelope.png" />
In most Intercon-style games, these pre-written secrets are integral to
both the narrative and, in LARPs that feature a gamist element, to the
gameplay and challenges presented. On a narrative level, the stories in
our games are often driven by secrets. The story beats often consist of
surprising revelations of material that is pre-written into player
backgrounds. In games in which players cooperate against challenges in
the game world itself, those challenges often take the forms of puzzles
or mysteries for which the players need to discover the correct answer.
For many games in which characters come into direct, mechanical conflict
with one another, the primary challenges consist of determining who can
be trusted, where other characters’ loyalties actually lie, and what
resources people can bring to bear on a conflict. When games feature
negotiation, one of the biggest bargaining chips tends to be other
characters’ secrets, and the
community has coined the phrase
“information economy” to reflect that character secrets are often the de
facto currency of the game.

<div style="clear: right;"></div>
### Where does the culture of secrecy come from?

People come to LARP from all over: from tabletop roleplay, from improv
theater, from historical reenactment and combat sports. Two large
influences on the New England theater-style scene were “Assassin” style
games and murder mystery games[^2], both of which hinge on secrets. In
the former, players are assigned a hidden “target” which they must get
close to and “assassinate” through a variety of means (nerf gun, buzzer
traps, etc). In the latter type, people are given a backstory and must
probe the inconsistencies in other characters’ stories in order to solve
a mystery. It’s not that surprising that as our games grew in complexity
and drifted away from these sources, they kept the familiar focus on
secrets.

The seriousness with which we treat preserving these secrets stems from
how we write games. Intercon-style games are somewhat unique in the
sheer amount of written material that goes into them, and thus the
amount of prep that they require. Games often have character sheets of 5
pages or more, meaning that a 20-character game could easily contain 100
pages of writing for a 4-hour event. These games can often take dozens
of person-hours to create, or even hundreds for some of the larger
games. As a result, successful games tend to be re-run several times in
order to get more out of the substantial time investment that went into
them. It’s not uncommon for these games to be brought back and re-run
years down the line, when enough new players have entered the community
that haven’t had a chance to experience it in the initial runs. Thus
spoilers can remain a concern almost indefinitely.

### What are our social norms around secrecy

Social norms around spoilers in the community resemble general common
courtesy about spoilers you would see in other media, but with one major
difference. When we discuss spoilers with regard to movies or TV shows,
the point is usually to protect the media consumer from unintentionally
having the surprise ruined for them. Thus spoiler etiquette consists
mostly of warning a potential consumer if you are about to discuss
substantial spoilers from a work they might not yet have seen. In the
etiquette of the Northeastern theater LARP community, the purpose
extends to also protect the creator against having the size of the
potential unspoiled audience for their work reduced. This concern stems
from the prep-intensive nature of our LARPs. LARP writers who invest
dozens of hours into writing the materials for a LARP are “paid back” by
seeing the enjoyment that players derive from it. Because so often the
core gameplay of these LARPs revolves around unearthing secrets, some
organizers will go so far as to consider someone who has been spoiled as
no longer able to play the game. There’s often a sense in the community
that if you spoil a potential player on the secrets of a game, you’re
not only depriving that player of the joy of surprise, you’re depriving
the writer of seeing a player experience that surprise—or depriving them
of having an audience for their game at all.

The fact that our spoiler etiquette extends in this way means that it’s
no longer always enough to simply warn that an online discussion may
contain spoilers. There is an expectation that the LARP writer has some
say over what can be spoiled as well. If a LARP writer requests that
people not talk about their game’s twists in public, this request is
usually deferred to by those in the community. Beyond this, there is
often an expectation that someone wishing to write publicly about a
game’s secrets seek approval from the writer first, something that is
never seen when discussing other forms of media. When asked how they
would feel if someone wrote publicly about their game without consulting
them first—even if clearly labelled as containing spoilers—several local
LARPers I spoke with admitted that they would feel put out.

### Consequences of Secrecy

The prevalence of pre-written secret information has had a number of
effects on our design traditions as well as on our culture. Some of
these are neutral, quirks that arise from having games heavily built
around the revelation of secret information. Take for instance this
publication’s namesake, the game wrap. A game wrap is a local tradition,
a type of post-LARP debrief specifically structured around the
revelation of “what is really going on.” During a game wrap, the GMs or
the individual players will often go through and shed light on any major
mysteries of the game (“So, who really killed Mr. Body?”), as well as
reveal the true natures of characters and what they were after (“Ha, I
was really working for the enemy all along!”) This focus on the
revelation of secret information serves to differentiate it from debrief
in Nordic Larp which tend to focus more on creating a sense of closure
and processing the emotional content of the LARP. Because of its focus
on revealing in game secrets, some local groups refer to it as a
“spill,” as in “to spill one’s secrets.”

Too often, however, the focus on secrecy has had some negative
consequences for how we design and discuss games. On the design side, we
have the prevalence of the “big twist” LARP (sometimes called a
“bait-and-switch” LARP by its detractors.) This is a LARP where the
entire advertised premise of the LARP is, in some significant way,
inaccurate. Maybe a game advertised as a Victorian comedy of manners is
actually a horror game, with several of the characters actually playing
vampires. Or maybe a game advertised as high fantasy is actually a
post-apocalyptic game, with players finding out that all of their
magical artifacts are really just lost technology from before the fall
of civilization.

<div class="pull-quote right">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <p>
    “Big twist” LARPs can lead to unsatisfying gameplay if players are not given sufficiently accurate information to strategize effectively.
  </p>

  <div class="bottomline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>
</div>

These types of games are the subject of growing controversy within the
community. For some, they can create an exciting sense of surprise and
shock when the player puts together what is really going on. For others,
they are seen as breaking the sense of trust that exists between the
players and GMs. Locally, many of these games are run at conventions
alongside dozens of other LARPs. Players often have a choice between
several LARPs in a given time slot at these conventions, but may only
make it to a small number of these events in a year. There is often a
real sense of frustration when a player chooses a game because it is in
a preferred genre, only to find out 15 minutes in that it is really of a
different genre that they have no interest in. For players who relish
the surprise that these games provide, the twist often has more impact
the less they were able to see it coming, which makes writers of these
games reluctant to even advertise that the game might not be what is
written on the tin.

<div>
  In more gamist or competitive games, these “big twist” LARPs can lead to
  unsatisfying gameplay if players are not given sufficiently accurate
  information to strategize effectively. Because of the simple conflict
  mechanics that many games employ, which often involve little or no
  element of player skill, gameplay challenge often consists of taking a
  calculated risk by choosing whether to engage in conflict in the first
  place. These risks often incorporate what a player knows (e.g., “Most of
  the lords openly support my bid for succession over my rival”) as well
  as “known unknowns” (e.g., “I don’t know if the lords who claim to
  support my bid will betray me”). “Big twist” LARPs often incorporate an
  excessive number of “unknown unknowns”: twists
  <div class="pull-quote left">
    <div class="topline-widget">
      <div class="left"></div>
      <div class="center"></div>
      <div class="right"></div>
    </div>

    <p>
      Our culture around
      secrecy poses even
      greater problems for
      how we discuss and
      write about LARPs.
    </p>

    <div class="bottomline-widget">
      <div class="left"></div>
      <div class="center"></div>
      <div class="right"></div>
    </div>
  </div>
  that a player can’t
  strategize around because they are beyond the normal boundaries of what
  they would consider possible in the world as presented (e.g., “One of
  the lords not supporting my bid is a time-travelling robot, come back
  from the future to warn my rival of my plot”). Twists like these destroy
  a player’s ability to take calculated risks, because there are
  effectively no longer any boundaries to what the “unknown unknowns”
  might be.
  <p></p>
</div>

Beyond design, I think our culture around secrecy poses even greater
problems for how we discuss and write about LARPs. The Nordic LARP
tradition, which also focuses heavily on one-shot games, has a long
tradition of writing about their games. Publications like the
[Knutepunkt books](http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Knutepunkt-books) books and [nordiclarp.org](http://nordiclarp.org) contain articles that both
document how the LARP played out, as well as provide a post-mortem
analysis on the design decisions that were made and how they succeeded
or failed. No similar tradition exists in the Intercon community. Last
year’s Intercon featured over 75 individual LARPs none of which, to my
knowledge, were the subject of similar documentation. While some
discussion happens on social media, of course, I am aware of [only one blogger](https://fairescape.wordpress.com/)
who provides public post-game reports of games run in the
community with any regularity, and even then concern over spoilers often
leads to them being heavily redacted.

The problem with this is that public, written discussion is what allows
us to learn design lessons from games that we haven’t played personally.
This failure to document LARP design puts us at risk of needing to
re-invent the wheel and repeating the avoidable mistakes of the past.
While in-person game discussion is common, taboos around spoilers often
mean that such discussions hinge around games that all people present
have already played in. Relying solely on in-person discussion makes our
design knowledge unavailable to newcomers just joining the community,
and limits cross-pollination of ideas with other communities with which
we are not in personal contact.

### Where do we go from here?

Despite the problems I see stemming from a focus on secrets and spoiler
culture, I don’t think that going to the other extreme of
full-transparency in LARP writing would be a good thing for our
community. While it has its drawbacks, our LARP traditions around
secrecy also allow us to create experiences that are difficult to
provide in an environment where everything is known to everyone. These
secrets allow us to create intricate mysteries and carefully balanced
webs of intrigue that wouldn’t be possible if everything were made
available to players beforehand. Creating these types of experiences in
LARP is a unique strength of our community, and one that would be a
shame to completely lose if we were to move universally towards fully
transparent games.

The problem then isn’t secrecy, but how we prioritize surprise over
other forms of engagement. By treating the preservation of in-game
secrets as something sacred—an absolute which we don’t even think of
compromising on when we design—we miss opportunities when we could trade
a small amount of surprise for a larger improvement somewhere else in
the LARP experience.

Take for instance the design tradition of contingency envelopes. These
are envelopes containing written information that are given to players
with the instruction to read the contents when a specific event happens.
A common use of these is an envelope with the instruction to open when
you see another specific character in the game. The contents go on to
tell you that you recognize that character as someone that you did not
expect to see in game, such as a family member that your character
thought was dead. The problem is that maintaining the surprise of that
character’s appearance in this way also disrupts the flow of what should
otherwise be a very dramatic scene. At a moment that should be a
dramatic reunion, you now have two players fishing through their pockets
for envelopes to open instead. We need to ask ourselves if that
disruption to immersion and drama is worth spoiling the surprise that an
unexpected character is in game. We should look closely at how impactful
that surprise will be, and how much disruption preserving it until game
time will cause, and consider giving some information ahead of time
instead.

Dealing with the question of the “Big Twist” LARP is a tricky one,
because for all their pitfalls, there really is a subset of players that
really enjoy them. Here I think we again need to consider matters in
terms of the tradeoffs we are making, which means avoiding the big twist
when the surprise isn’t actually going to yield a big payoff, or when it
is particularly likely to annoy players. For instance, the revelation of
supernatural in an otherwise mundane LARP is a common trope in our LARP
tradition, and it doesn’t have the impact that it once did, as players
have come to expect it. Furthermore, introducing supernatural elements
to what is billed as a mundane LARP centered around interpersonal drama
is more likely to annoy players than merely blending two fantastical
genres. It’s also important that a twist not render a character’s
decisions during the game meaningless. The revelation that a magical
artifact is really technological in nature might change how you look at
the world while still leaving your strategies intact; the addition of a
time traveller to an otherwise historical LARP changes the rules of the
in-game world entirely.

Most importantly of all, we need to change our culture around spoilers
to avoid stifling public discussion of LARPs. I’m not suggesting
abandoning the common courtesy we extend around spoilers in other media.
<img class="text-clip secrecy-in-intercon-style-larp-spoiler-alert-sign" src="/vol1/images/secrecy-in-intercon-style-larp-spoiler-alert-sign.png" />
Rather, I’m suggesting that we need to treat it exactly as we would any
other medium: warn people when we intend to discuss spoilers and let
them make their own decisions from there. Ultimately, I think that
writers need to lead the way here, both by expressing that frank
discussion of our LARPs is O.K., and by analyzing and documenting our
own LARPs once they are past the initial set of runs.
Bad design is
ultimately a fixable problem, but surrendering the tools we have to
improve our designs is a much more serious problem. And open discussion
of our design decisions is one of the most powerful tools for improving
game design at our disposal.

<hr/>

*Brian Richburg has been active in the New England theater-style and live-combat LARP communities for almost a decade. He is involved in a number of NEIL projects, including volunteer work for the Intercon LARP conventions and Game Wrap.*

[^1]: By "Intercon-style Larp" I mean a particular style of one-shot theater-style LARP using pre-generated characters, which is popular in the American Northeast and is typical of games run at the Intercon conventions. It is not meant to imply that this type of LARP only runs at Intercon, or that only this type of LARP runs at Intercon.

[^2]: Budin, Nat.  "Over Time: Intercon and evolution of theatre-style larp in the Northeast"  *Wyrdcon Companion 2012*. 2012. 65-70. [http://www.wyrdcon.com/2014/05/the-wyrd-con-companion-book/](http://www.wyrdcon.com/2014/05/the-wyrd-con-companion-book/)

