---
layout: vol1
content_type: text/html
title: "Smile and Smile and Be a Villain: Supporting the Narrative Function of Villain Roles in Larp"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">Smile and Smile and Be a Villain</h2>
    Supporting the Narrative Function of Villain Roles in Larp
  </div>
  by Phoebe Roberts
</header>

In theater-style larp, the process of telling the story provides a big
chunk of the fun. The opportunity to be an interesting character, follow
their journey, pursue their goals, and use their capabilities is all
provided by the unfolding story as a major part of the player
experience. And though there are many ways to tell a compelling story,
it’s a longstanding aphorism that you can’t have drama without conflict.
Conflict provides a struggle which adds dimension and interest to the
pursuit of goals, as well as creates the investment in the proceedings
that accompanies things which only come hard-won. One of the most
obvious tactics for creating that conflict within the story comes from
the inclusion of villain characters—antagonist PCs with goals and
motives designed to drive them to act in opposition to other characters
in the game.

Unfortunately, designing a villain PC to serve this vital narrative
function is much trickier than it may at first appear. Some of the
purpose the character is designed to serve may be at odds with the goals
of the larp play experience. Villains, by definition, need to stand in
conflict with the views and desires of other characters so they can
clash. If they are true villains, instead of merely antagonists, they
represent some presence of “evil” that ought to be borne out in their
attitudes and actions. Because of these demands, villains present
particular challenges to ensuring that they are enjoyable to play. It
comes down to balancing the needs of the player versus the needs of the
game, and it can be hard to make sure that the villain role does both.
This article will first examine what difficulties the inclusion of a
villain character can pose to the balance of storytelling and play
experience, addressing the issues of narrative demand, player
satisfaction, and effect on the larger game. Then strategies a writer
can employ will be discussed, in order to make best use of villain PCs
while avoiding these problems.

The first step is to understand the challenges involved in achieving
that end. The villain character is often conceived of in relation to the
resolution the writer had in mind for the important conflicts. Generally
players (and writers) tend to believe that the “good guys” of the story
ought to come out on top, which can lead to the hope that the heroes
will “succeed” and the villains will “fail” by the end of the game. In
theater-style larp, we don’t like to emphasize “winning” and “losing”
too heavily, as it creates a somewhat false metric of success for
playing a game. It’s much more preferable that players tell a compelling
story and have an enjoyable time, independent of whether they are any
sort of objective “victor.” At the same time, another tenet of creating
drama is that characters ought to want something, so having goals to
achieve creates investment and drive to act. The prospect of attaining
whatever goals have been set down as important to a character can
provide player satisfaction. In such a case, where the writer is
ultimately hoping that the “hero” characters will achieve goals in
opposition to those of the more “villainous” characters, this means
that, one way or another, the villain PCs are set up for failure.

This is not automatically a bad thing, given the lack of emphasis on
success as a measure of the story or experience. But it can have
consequences to player autonomy, both in perception and in reality. When
a character is set up to be unable to really achieve their goals, it can
make the player feel like nothing they do matters. This can be
discouraging, and lead them to feeling like there is no reason to make
an effort or take action. Players generally like to have agency unless
specifically prepared ahead of time. In games that are not explicitly on
rails, villain players may feel like they are handicapped so that the
so-called “desirable” endings can occur. And of course, this is only if
the player is aware that they’re intended to fail. If they aren’t aware,
and learn of their impossible situation after the game, it often creates
disappointment after the fact, a dissatisfaction with the time and
effort invested during play.

Additionally, just the knowledge that a player is supposed to act in a
particular way in order to make the game work—in this case, pushing the
conflict—risks compromising their freedom of choice. They can feel
pressured to make choices they don’t want to make to ensure the function
of the game overall. Depending on the expectations the player had going
in, that can be met with resistance and frustration.

Many players may not want to play villains because they don’t want the
experience of being despised or persecuted by the rest of the cast. Due
to the tendency to favor the good guys over the bad, there tend to be
many more heroes than villains in any given larp. Being the one of the
rare villains in a game can be a lonely experience, particularly when
everyone around you is motivated to thwart you. It can also compromise
execution of the antagonist role, causing excessive caution in the
player for fear of retribution from opposing players. Anything that
leaves a player isolated as well as inactive is a problem, considering
both the purpose of villain roles, and that interacting with others is a
major interest of theater-style role players.

</div>

<img src="/vol1/images/smile-and-smile-and-be-a-villain-masked-figures.jpg" class="img-responsive" />

<div class="content-container">

Being too unique in the game is not the only reason villains risk
isolation. The nature of the hero-villain opposition means that the
villain is likely to be set upon and neutralized the moment they are
identified as such. This is where the phenomenon of the “lynch mob”
comes from, a group of usually protagonist characters ganging up to
confront their common antagonist and overwhelm them with their number.
In Breaking Light Productions’ *Alice*, a gothic reinterpretation of
Alice in Wonderland, the primary antagonist has been so dangerous and so
universally opposed that other PCs have found it necessary to converge
on him in this manner in all six of its runs. (Roberts) Given that
villains already face so much opposition to their efforts, this
represents the extremity of the situation.

Next, villainy usually requires very active players. If villain PCs are
included in the game, a common role they play is “problem creator,”
someone whose actions make challenges for other players to respond to.
With their status as an evil or negative presence, they bring negative
circumstances into play, which characters of a more positive bent will
naturally counter. The clashing of these two opposing impulses achieves
our end goal of creating conflict. But in this framework, the villain
must be very proactive, coming up with schemes and putting them into
effect with less, or entirely without, in-game prompting. This requires
a high level of creativity, energy, and effort on the player’s part.
Many find this to be too excessively demanding to be enjoyable,
particularly if they prefer a play style that is more reactive to other
events.

A final major concern is finding players who are willing to be as wicked
as the villain is written to be. Many larpers simply don’t want to be or
do the sort of things being a villain entails—immoral deeds, obstructing
other characters, espousing repellent ideas. And what if your villain is
truly repugnant, such as a racist or a rapist? If you have such
characters in your game, casting them can be near impossible, when some
people find even the simple idea of being in conflict with others to be
unbearable.

All this can mean that it can be very challenging to design a villain
that will both serve your story without being prohibitively difficult to
cast. But I’m old-fashioned—I believe very strongly that drama *is*
conflict, such that you can’t have drama otherwise. That conflict has to
come from somewhere. But you may ask, why use villain PCs in order to
provide it? I would argue because it provides richness to the
narrative. 

A larp writer intends for the players to become invested in their
characters, so they more fully involve themselves in the larp. The most
compelling characters are rarely simple, and one of the most fascinating
dimensions of human complexity can be moral. Furthermore, if every role
were too similar, the game would become bland, losing the specificity
that true individuality creates. Characters feel more human when they
are as unique as real people actually are. But although each PC may be
the hero of their own story, in a larp’s complicated web of desires
pursued by diverse personalities, they don’t need to be Snidely Whiplash
to serve as the villain in someone else’s. It is simply the natural
consequence of creating an array of varied and complex roles that they
will sometimes want things that other characters do not. When there can
be no drama without conflict, it is well worth the effort to find a way
to make that conflict playable if it means more interesting characters,
narrative, and gameplay. So, in order to deal with their challenges and
make use of their advantages, villains should be designed and cast in
such a way as to allow the player to enjoy that job of pushing the
conflict. This requires taking the problems mentioned above into account
in order to work around them.

The place to begin is by ensuring the character has the right degree of
capability to act. It may help to make certain a villain player has some
agency, or at least the feeling of having it. This may seem dangerous if
you are invested in the heroes coming out triumphant in the end. But the
villain’s ability to present some kind of serious threat heightens the
tension and raises the stakes of the entire story. If there is nothing
for the heroes to overcome, the victory does not feel satisfying. So it
can be helpful to ensure the antagonist character has the resources,
abilities, and knowledge to actually make a real challenge to others.
Even if you stack the deck against them, and make it very difficult
indeed for them to win, when the villain player knows they have these
things at their disposal, it makes them feel more able to affect things.
Finding this balance tends to be better for the game overall, not only
to improve the experience for the villain players.

Even further, I would advocate for never making it absolutely impossible
for the opposition to come out on top in the end. If a player is clever
and creative enough, the game ought to be set up so that their
cleverness is rewarded. It encourages future efforts toward maximum
brilliance and boldness from players, which always results in more
interesting games. It also helps heads off the villain feeling as though
their actions cannot have a meaningful effect on play. In the debut run
of *The Prince Comes of Age*, a high fantasy comedy of manners, one of
the primary antagonists found that by telling elaborate lies and making
up powers she did not possess, she could manipulate her unsuspecting
targets without detection. (*The Prince Comes of Age by Jonathan
Kindness et al*) There was nothing specifically in the design of the
game intending for this, but permitting it made the character more
effective and allowed the player greater enjoyment. This positive
feedback on their creative efforts from the game gave the player the
feeling that their actions matters and they had a sufficient level of
agency.

This of course raises the question of what exactly that correct agency
level is. In the hero-versus-villain competition, there is a risk of a
villain’s success making the game less enjoyable for other players. If
you are concerned with whether or not villains’ victory will make for an
inappropriate ending to the narrative, you can manage the win conditions
for the character’s achieving of their goals. It is possible to make it
so that characters’ goals are not completely mutually exclusive, so no
one’s victory necessarily means someone else’s total defeat. The
potential problem, however, is that in lowering the barrier to success,
it can neutralize the conflict, which defeats the purpose of including
villains in the first place. But if the writer balances the achieving of
oppositional goals with personal ones that no other actor is
particularly trying to prevent, there can be a chance to snatch at least
some meaningful, satisfying victory even if overall the character is
meant for defeat. Perhaps your wicked schemer will not succeed in
wresting away the throne from the rightful heir, but if they can have an
engaging romance plot, or explore their relationship with their
estranged sibling, it may still feel like time well spent. The key, in
this case, is providing an array of objectives of varying size,
contentiousness, and difficulty to achieve.

There is the danger that in allowing a villain to triumph means loss and
disappointment for what may amount to the lion’s share of the cast.
Villains and evil characters in general tend to be outliers in a given
game, with most PCs either being actively protagonistic or at least not
working against the interests of anyone else. So when that minority
achieves something at the expense of their opponents, you are likely to
have made a pleasant experience for a small number of players at the
expense of the majority. In that case, a balancing measure can take the
form of how the villain’s victory expresses in gameplay. Often it serves
as a nice compromise to allow the villain the chance to achieve their
ends, but make it so that the consequences thereof trigger after the
period of play is over. In such a case, the GMs can declare that the
villain’s success did come to pass, but not until after the point in the
story at which play has ended. This can soften the negative consequences
by making them less immediate. In *The Dying of the Light*, a two-hour
high weirdness Iron GM game from The Melpomenauts, it is possible for
certain antagonists to bring about an event that would conclusively end
the narratives of all other characters. (Benderskaya et al) But if the
conditions for this are met, the players continue on until the
conclusion of the game as normal, and are informed later that the
villain’s event would later come to pass. The villain got to achieve
their goal, but the other PCs didn’t feel particularly defeated by it,
as it didn’t actually affect their experience of play.

Another way to combat the agency issue in villainy is to ensure that
there is a team of PC allies for them to work with. As mentioned before,
antagonists tend to be vastly outnumbered by protagonists in most games.
By ensuring there are at least a few other like-minded, sympathetic, or
at least symbiotic individuals in the cast along with them, these
characters will have more strength in numbers. Additionally, this is a
good way to prevent them from becoming too isolated. Their team members
can be characters with whom they can be honest and collaborative, and
are actively interested in interacting with them. With at least one or
two others designed to be on their side, they have both the power of
group cooperation behind them as well as a built-in source of positive
intercourse.

If the concern is the villain being too easily overwhelmed and having no
one to engage with, a useful design choice can be to make it so that it
is not immediately obvious to other PCs that the character even is a
villain. Secret antagonists can be much more playable than apparent
ones, as they do not invite immediate opposition to their actions. Other
players will be much more open to talking to and even confiding in them,
heading off the issue of having no positive in-game connections. This
provides a little more leeway to maneuver towards their goals, because
their actions are not automatically scrutinized for evil intent. All
this gives the character the sense of having a fighting chance, and a
play experience more like the other PCs. As such, many writers take it
for granted that villains must be secret at the top of game, though it
is certainly possible for antagonists to be set up clearly from the
start. In that case, however, it may be necessary for the villainy to be
less extreme or not so explicitly evil, so as to not face immediate
opposition from the rest of the game. The difficult cousin character in
the family reunion game probably has a better chance of being a
functional open villain than the high fantasy evil wizard scheming to
murder the king. A good rule of thumb is the more you can foresee the
character being killed or imprisoned as a consequence for his actions,
the better off they’re likely to be working in secret.

Many of these strategies encourage the writer to take advantage of the
shorter-term form, at least for truly evil characters. It is much easier
to design workable, actively malicious villains in a game with a briefer
period of play, specifically the two-, four-, or six-hour game, and
certainly no longer than a weekend. It doesn’t make diegetic sense in
most cases for heroic characters to tolerate the presence of villains
for long, particularly when they’re actively working towards negative
ends. And the more a villain does, the more difficult it is to remain
undetected. When the villain is at last discovered, they will probably
not stay alive or free very long against all the other characters who
oppose them. The villain player will not be able to fully participate
after this happens, removing them from the game. Early removal can be
tolerable in a short game, but if a player goes in with the expectation
of many sessions of play as a villain, they are likely to be
disappointed. If a writer desires to include active, malevolent
villains, a short-form game is a much better option to make than a
longer-term or serialized one.

It is also possible to include antagonists that are oppositional, but
not necessarily in a way that is intensely malevolent. Technically, the
definitions of “protagonist” and “antagonist” do not map precisely to
“hero” and “villain.” A protagonist is simply the narrative figure
attempting to work towards a goal, while an antagonist is the narrative
figure opposing their actions. These terms do not have an inherent moral
dimension; it’s only that we usually tend to make our characters who
make positive efforts our protagonists, and those who make negative ones
our antagonists. If you use antagonists to provide conflict rather than
truly evil characters, it not only widens the range of players
interested in portraying them, it can also lead to fascinating character
dimensions that are a little less black and white than the basic
hero-villain dichotomy.

However, often when you choose to soften these PCs, it helps to have an
additional source of conflict from elsewhere in the game to make sure
there is still a sufficient level of struggle. Many games, particularly
those intended to run over a longer term, make most of the problems
facing the PCs come from something external, such as an in-game
circumstance or the actions of an NPC. This has the advantage of
allowing the GM the control to keep the conflict level as high as
desired while circumventing any aversion to pushing it on the players’
part. It is also a good way to get the presence of truly evil villainy
in the game. If someone wants to include a terrible monster figure, or a
figure of one of the special kinds of evil that players often feel
uncomfortable embodying, it may be most workable to have it take the
form of an NPC. *The Stand* is a cowboy game set in the American west
before the Civil War, and racism is a presence in an effort to
incorporate some sense of historical realism. But given that players
consistently have an aversion to consciously behaving or speaking in a
racist manner, the most virulent bigot is an NPC villain whose actions
have an effect on the PCs’ journeys in-game. (Roberts) It allows the
theme to be expressed without making players behave in a manner they
don’t find fun.

All of this is what a writer can do to manage the workings of a villain
character in the design process. But the last line of defense, and
sometimes the most effective, is getting the right player in the role.
Setting expectations correctly may be the single most effective way to
ensure you get a player base that will have a good time. You need a way
to choose which people are the best possibilities for the needs of your
particular villain role. It’s easy to include a question, or multiple
questions, on the casting form about it. “How do you feel about playing
a villain?” “How do you feel about having the game stacked against you?”
“How do you feel about acting in service to the plot?” While they are
certainly less common, there are definitely people who actively enjoy
the challenges of villainy. And securing the player’s complicity
beforehand is always beneficial; in fact, even letting them know things
beforehand has the tendency to make people much more open to
possibilities than they might be if you sprung it on them. And of
course, you can drop the veil a little bit and directly obtain buy-in
from your villain player. Make it explicit that you are looking for
someone who is willing to actively push the conflict and then go out in
a blaze of glory in the service of telling a good story. Because telling
good narrative can require certain managed choices, many players who
value the narrative in particular are happy to make those choices to
tell the most interesting tale.

After all, telling an engaging story through larp is a major source of
the fun of the game. Managing the conflict level is a necessity to
ensure that a story is told in a compelling way that entices the players
to emotionally invest. The inclusion of villain PCs can be a narratively
strong choice to achieve that end, though it can be fraught with
challenges. But with a little careful consideration, at both the design
and the running levels, they can be well worth the effort with the
dimension they bring to your larp cast and to the game at large.

### Bibliography

Benderskaya, Liliya, Kat Davis, Joshua Rachlin, and Tory Root. *The
Dying of the Light*. 2013. Live action role play game.

*The Prince Comes of Age by Jonathan Kindness, Matthew Kamm, and Bernie
Gabin*. Produced by Happier Far Games. Festival of the Larps, Waltham,
MA. 2011. Production of live action role play game.

Roberts, Phoebe. *Alice*. 2007. Live action role play game.

Roberts, Phoebe. *The Stand*. 2011. Live action role play game.

<hr/>

*Phoebe Roberts is an MFA-trained playwright and screenwriter who has
been larping since 2007—and playing more than her share of villains! In
that time, she has turned her love of storytelling to the writing of
twelve live action games, solo and in teams. She is also on the
editorial staff for Game Wrap Magazine. Her writing for larp and for
other dramatic forms can be found on her website, [www.phoeberoberts.com](http://www.phoeberoberts.com).*
