---
layout: vol1
content_type: text/html
title: "The Cowardice of Your Convictions"
---

<header class="article-header">
  <div class="topline-widget">
    <div class="left"></div>
    <div class="center"></div>
    <div class="right"></div>
  </div>

  <div class="article-title">
    <h2 class="text-uppercase">The Cowardice of Your Convictions</h2>
  </div>
  by Warren Tusk
</header>

It is much, much easier to be virtuous in a roleplaying game than in
real life.

It’s appealing, too, especially in a live-action scenario. Tabletop GMs
are often advised to plan for their PCs acting like psychopathic
monsters, but in LARPing—some kinds of theater LARPing, anyway, within
certain gaming communities[^1]—it’s far more common to encounter the
exact opposite. Players often drift towards portraying their characters
as saints, or at least eliding their characters’ moral failings.

There are some obvious, predictable reasons for this tendency to take
hold. LARPing is a high-powered imaginative technology that produces a
strong visceral identification between player and character, and most
people much prefer feeling like a good person to feeling like a bad
person. What’s more, the flurry of real-time social interactions
triggers the usual suite of basic human social impulses (*I want these
people to like and trust me*, *I don’t want to upset anyone*, etc.),
which pushes inexorably towards niceness and decency. All of this is
exacerbated by the fact that, in LARPs, niceness and decency are usually
the tactically-optimal choices for most characters. When gameplay mostly
boils down to “convince people to care about you and help you,” it helps
a lot to be sympathetic and appealing and cooperative.

Whatever the reasons, this pull towards moral excellence on the part of
PCs reliably manifests in a number of separate-but-related ways:

**PCs are not selfish with their time or resources.** In a LARP, just
like in real life, offering someone a helping hand produces warm
emotional fuzzies and the possibility of strategically-beneficial
alliances. *Unlike* in real life, this comes at no real cost, because
“going out of your way to help” tends not to be genuinely taxing in any
way, and is likely to be more fun and interesting than not. Who could be
surprised that the average PC sees helpfulness as a pretty good deal?
The situation is even more pronounced with mechanical game resources,
such as money and items. These don’t actually have any use at all
outside the game, but within the game they often unlock exciting plots
and outcomes, and so there’s lots of incentive not to hoard them in the
name of self-interest.

**PCs love to cooperate and negotiate.** Expect to see ancient foes
somehow managing to get over their differences, or abiding disagreements
of principle being hashed out amicably and reasonably. Cutting deals
with your enemies or rivals is usually a risky tactic…but LARPs reward
fun high-risk tactics, because the consequences of failure aren’t real
(and tend not to be very dire even in game terms). Finding a win-win
solution or even a best-available-compromise feels much more like an
accomplishment than being obstinate or bellicose, and provides more in
the way of rewarding interpersonal interactions. This particular
phenomenon has a way of feeding on itself, because when you have some
sense that your counterparty is likely to be open to cooperation, *that
alone is enough to make cooperation a better option*.

**PCs will not be bound by prejudice or nasty-seeming ideology.** If
your characters are supposed to be sexist, or orc-hating, or dismissive
of robot personhood, or inclined to burn witches at the stake—well,
chances are that they just won’t be. And if they *are*, it will probably
prove remarkably easy for the forces of enlightenment and tolerance to
pull them away from their opinions. Casual broad-brush statements made
in public documents (e.g., “this is a sexist setting where most people
are very sexist”) are often ineffective. Specific PCs with especial
reasons to be prejudiced (e.g., the Witchfinder-General or the leader of
the We Hate Orcs Party) are likely to give it more of a sincere try, but
regardless, they usually have a way of looking for excuses to drop their
nastiness at an early opportunity. Even the very most stubborn ones
often end up as lone angry voices crying in the wilderness, without any
power to make other PCs listen or to influence the game world in
accordance with their prejudice.

All of this makes perfect sense, psychologically and strategically. In
our society, bigots are treated as especially contemptible, and no one
much enjoys the feeling of identifying with them. Players are likely to
have some out-of-character discomfort with the idea of presenting a
bigoted demeanor to other players with only the thin veil of “roleplay
license” as social protection. And, above all else, *being a bigot is a
losing proposition in most LARPs*. LARP authors tend to be egalitarian
types, these days, and their works reflect it. Within any given game
world, the bigots are very likely to be just plain wrong; probably the
orcs aren’t really always-chaotic-evil, the robots aren’t really
mindless slaves, and the women aren’t really hysterical and unfit for
men’s work. Investing in bigotry requires sinking precious time and
effort into being unhelpfully wrong. Furthermore, since every PC
represents a valuable concatenation of resources (time, social
influence, mechanical widgets, etc.), the in-character bigots who write
off some PCs as not being valued allies are likely to be behind from the
get-go in terms of achieving their goals.

**PCs are resistant to vice and temptation.** In real life, people
constantly do things that are bad ideas, because they’re lazy or greedy
or irritable or lustful. This is less true in LARPs. Being lazy is not
much of an issue when your goal is to have active social fun, and when
most possible things you can do are pretty easy; greed fails to be
compelling when the prizes being dangled are fakeries that will vanish
within hours; LARPers, unlike their characters, often have trouble
channeling the sort of long-standing pervasive dislike of one another
that leads to reflexive destructive antagonism; and as for lust, well,
it’s easy to see why in-character seduction doesn’t work as well as
real-life seduction. Against all these much-weakened forces is pitted
rationality, which is much *stronger* in LARPs than in real life,
because LARPs are often simple systems where it’s not hard to figure out
what the objective best ideas actually are. So it’s not a shock that PCs
tend to home in on good plans and to sidestep the personal moral
pitfalls that might serve as obstacles.

<p class="text-center">
  <span class="black-square"></span>
</p>

None of these things is *inherently* a problem. LARPing is all about
getting to play out the fictional roles that you find appealing, and if
many players find it appealing to take on the role of a good person,
that’s not a crime. Quite the reverse. It probably says something
more-or-less encouraging about human nature.

But in many circumstances, these tendencies can play hell with a LARP’s
narrative fabric, rendering it less engaging and less artistically
worthwhile as an experience. In the worst cases, they can totally
subvert the story that the author was trying to tell, and render
everything cheap- and silly-feeling for the PCs as a whole.

In the most general sense, the narratives of theater-style LARPs are
usually all about character conflicts, and most conflicts are ultimately
driven by *someone* being less than totally virtuous. PCs who steer hard
towards cooperation, and away from difficult tensions, are often making
their own experiences more boring; PCs who are resolutely good to
everyone are often taking away other people’s reasons to struggle with
them, and thereby smothering the drama.

And in a much more narrow-bore sense, there are a lot of gripping
narratives that rely directly on central characters being bad in
particular ways. There’s real value in telling stories about sin (and
perhaps redemption), stories about spiraling hatred and antagonism (and
perhaps the ways they can be overcome), stories about prejudice and
cruelty (and perhaps how they can be defeated), stories about
communities treating their members badly (and perhaps learning to do
better)…but all of these stories rely on their characters playing their
parts. PCs who are sufficiently determined to be nice can make all those
stories impossible to tell through the medium of LARP.

Fortunately, as a game author, you’ve got access to a wide variety of
tools that you can use to pull your PCs away from over-virtuousness and
towards the negative character traits that you want them to have.

**Resist the temptation to make your game into a morality play.** This
is a big high-concept umbrella idea, with a lot of concrete actionable
subcomponents—and, in a moment, I’ll be talking about those
subcomponents individually—but it’s worth taking a moment to think about
this abstractly.

We all have our own ideas about what is right and good and just. Those
ideas matter to us. So it is very tempting, in writing a LARP, to set
things up so that rightness and goodness and justice are rewarded while
wickedness is punished. And if that’s *really* the story that you want
to tell, go ahead. But you should be aware that you’ll be playing
directly into, and amplifying, your PCs’ natural inclinations…and you’ll
be encouraging them to short-circuit the conflicts and dramas that would
otherwise be making their stories interesting.

LARP authors, particularly newbie LARP authors with big epic ideas, are
often drawn to structures that produce optimal outcomes when the PCs are
cooperative and decent (and less-optimal outcomes when the PCs engage in
vice or struggle with each other). Those same authors tend to be
disappointed when their games resolve in easy hug-fests, or when their
players don’t seem to be grappling with the serious problems and
tensions that were written into the text.

PCs are usually pretty good at figuring out, and pursuing, the
structural incentives provided to them by the game. If you want them to
do something—like “engage with the darkness within themselves” or “fight
with one another”—*reward them for doing that thing, not the opposite*.
This is especially true when they have a built-in preference for doing
the “wrong thing,” as they do here. You don’t have to encourage PCs to
be good and nice; they’ll do that on their own. You may have to
encourage them to do anything else.

**Put your PCs in zero-sum competitions.** Offer narratively important
prizes, make it clear that those prizes can’t be shared, and set your
characters to fighting for them. When PCs realize that they actually
can’t get what they want by cooperating, they’re much less likely to
cooperate. As a bonus, they’ll probably develop more in-character
hostility once they realize that other people are directly standing in
the way of their goals.

I’ve seen this technique used to great effect in many political games.
It’s easy to create a scenario where only one person can win a
particular office, or where PCs are clashing over diametrically opposed
policy options. But you don’t actually need politics to make it work;
you just need any situation where there aren’t enough goodies to go
around.

The trick is making sure that the competition really is zero-sum. When
given the opportunity, PCs will often find clever ways to sidestep their
conflicts: supporting compromise candidates or compromise policies that
will give everyone what he wants, trying to use the MacGuffin for
multiple purposes simultaneously, and so on. If you want the struggle to
be real, you have to be explicit that this kind of thing won’t work.

> *Historical example: I once wrote a LARP called* The Song and the
> Sunrise *about a magic martial arts tournament where the winner’s
> prize was a genie-style wish—“whatever your heart desires”—on the
> theory that such a valuable thing would spur the PCs to true
> kung-fu-movie heights of competitiveness. In the first run of the
> game, however, the competition instead resolved into the winner saying
> “I wish for everyone here to get his own heart’s desire.” This made
> some sense from an in-character perspective, but it absolutely
> crippled the narrative. The difference between victory and defeat was
> rendered meaningless, and the action ended with a long, boring “town
> hall meeting” in which the PCs talked about how to use their wishes
> for the best overall good.*[^2] *In future runs, the wish mechanic had
> to be substantially restricted, in order to make it truly zero-sum.*

**Offer explicit rewards for betrayal, vice, and other antisocial
behaviors.** This is the most direct technique. In many contexts it’s
hard to engineer a way to use it, but when you can, it’s extremely
powerful; LARPers love cooperating, but they love receiving
game-relevant toys *even more*, and they’ll descend into all sorts of
darkness if you dangle the right bait.

The generalized version of this is: if you have some “bad thing” that
you want a PC to do or to think seriously about doing, take a moment to
ask yourself, “how can I make this thing seem more appealing from a
player’s-eye perspective?”

Contingency envelopes probably provide the simplest and most
widely-applicable technology here. If a PC starts the game with an
envelope labeled *Open this when you sell out your friend*, or *Open
this when you’ve yelled at someone in front of others*…well, he’s going
to be curious what’s inside, and that curiosity will push him towards
the relevant badness. That goes double if he has any real reason to
believe that the envelope is likely to contain rewards (game resources,
a new power, etc).

There are lots of other options, depending on your game structure. Have
an NPC offering concrete rewards in exchange for harm done to fellow PCs
(bribes for snitching, etc.). Provide mechanical bonuses for indulging
in vice (drugs that boost combat power, etc.). The possibilities are
endless.

> *Historical example: My greatest success with this technique was in a
> LARP called* Neon Genesis Revolution*, a fangame crossover between two
> anime series called* Neon Genesis Evangelion *and* Revolutionary Girl
> Utena*. The central mechanic of this game was a stat called
> Self-Worth, which was used to win duels and to complete other
> plot-relevant actions, and which went up and down according to a set
> of triggers that were unique to each PC. So it was trivial to give the
> slimier and more villainous PCs triggers like “gain 2 Self-Worth
> whenever you break someone’s heart.”*[^3] *One otherwise-good-hearted
> character was supposed to be an alcoholic, so we gave her the ability
> to get rid of a dangerous negative status effect by getting drunk and
> making a self-destructive decision.*[^4] *These systems were kind of
> blunt in the ways that they manipulated the players, but they resulted
> in some incredibly intense roleplay, and the PCs sure did engage with
> the darker aspects of their personalities.*

**Offer Faustian pacts that actually work as advertised, and that aren’t
cripplingly expensive.** This technique is a particularly noteworthy
instantiation of the previous one. Giving LARPers the chance to make
deals with the devil (or some narratively devil-like entity) is a very
clear way of providing game-relevant incentives for bad behavior; in my
experience, when executed correctly, it does a really good job of
getting PCs to think hard about their priorities and to do questionable
things that make for interesting stories.

Very often, though, the power of the Faustian pact is neutered by the
author’s desire to make it a really bad idea. PCs aren’t stupid or
self-destructive; they usually won’t sell away their souls, or their
most important values, for minor advantages. And “is this pact actually
a good deal for me?” is a much less interesting question than “are the
costs of this pact morally acceptable?”

As a rule, when PCs sell out to the devil, they should get something
pretty good for it—and the costs to them should mostly come in the form
of making them feel like bad people, rather than direct negative
consequences. The temptation should be a real and meaningful one, with
benefits that aren’t inherently self-defeating. The morality-play
version of the Faust story just doesn’t provide anything very useful to
most LARPs.

**Use text to emphasize negative PC attitudes and traits.** It’s easy
for PCs to ignore themes and issues that are mentioned only in passing,
or that are discussed in a boring way. It’s much harder for them to
ignore lengthy passages of gut-punching prose. If you want a PC to be
bad, or to contemplate badness, *use all your skill as a writer to tell
him about it*. Don’t just toss off a sentence saying that a character
has anti-orc sentiments—write a paragraph luridly describing the depths
of his passion, and then another paragraph explaining all the
psychological places where that passion comes from. Don’t just tell
Character A that he has an irrational hatred for Character B—blast him
with such a powerful description of the sentiment that he will *feel*
it.

Writers of all stripes often receive advice that amounts to “be as
concise and efficient as possible,” and there are good reasons for that,
but there are some purposes for which that advice is almost entirely
wrong. This is one of them. If you want to push PCs in directions that
they wouldn’t ordinarily go, you have to pull them hard into the
narrative, and that requires verbiage. Unless you’re a Hemingway, bald
no-frills descriptions aren’t going to cut it.

**Give your bad guys genuine power.** Many LARPs are supposed to feature
big multipolar social struggles between right and wrong, and those LARPs
often devolve into situations where a couple of designated “bad guys”
are grimly hanging onto their bad guy opinions while everyone else
ignores or steamrolls them. There’s a simple fix for that: *allow the
bad guys to punish other people for having non-bad-guy opinions*. (Or,
if you want to be slightly less hardcore, allow them to reward other
people for having bad guy opinions.) This is especially important if the
“bad guy” position is supposed to be the social default.

Let your inquisitors actually perform inquisitions, with consequences
that the other PCs will rightly fear. Give your villains the ability to
make or break other people’s key goals. This makes it *hard* to be a
good guy; you actually have to be willing to accept negative
consequences for your ideals. Which makes for a much more compelling
story than “we were nice because there didn’t seem to be any real reason
not to be.”

This works especially well with powerful NPCs, who aren’t limited by the
usual PC considerations of “trying to win,” and who are generally much
more willing to be arbitrarily unreasonable. A scary, authoritative NPC
driven by a negative ideology can do a lot to pull PCs into doing things
they wouldn’t otherwise do.

> *Historical example:* The Dance and the Dawn *is set in a fairy-tale
> court that’s supposed to be a scary place filled with heartbreak and
> intrigue. Unfortunately, the basic mechanical structure of the game
> encourages the PCs to cooperate intensively, because their goals are
> all perfectly compatible. This problem is largely kept under control
> by an NPC called the Queen of Ice, who has almost total power over
> everyone, and who is actively interested in causing the PCs to be
> terrible to each other. Those who live up to her cruel ideals, through
> backbiting and intrigue, get prizes from her that make it much easier
> for them to get what they want; those who are determined to play nice
> have to put up with her putting lots of obstacles in their paths.*[^5]
> *This usually results in at least some people deciding to be mean,
> which makes the game world feel a lot more like it’s supposed to
> feel.*

**Provide real evidence in support of bad opinions or ideologies.** The
designated bad guys are often stuck in the position of defending beliefs
that are clearly, unilaterally 100% wrong. This is a good way for an
author to make a statement about how no one should be a bad guy, but
it’s a terrible way to evoke drama (and it tends to make the bad guy
players involved very sad). If the bad guys are ever allowed to be
*right*—even “right for the wrong reasons”—it can make the dynamic much
more complicated, and give a serious shock to PCs who were expecting
their default moral-narrative assumptions to be confirmed.

Maybe, this time, the poor orc refugees really *are* scheming to kill
all the humans. Maybe, this time, tolerating that oppressed minority
religion really *will* result in the demon god getting summoned into the
world. The PCs will be stunned, and the obvious-seeming moral narrative
will become substantially more fraught and worthwhile.

I tend to like this technique on philosophical grounds as well as
dramatic grounds. It’s easy to defend nice-sounding principles if they
never ever lead to anything bad. It’s much more meaningful to make your
PCs defend those principles, or else abandon them, when the costs are
meaningful. And, in real life, the people filling the “good guy
role”—*whatever* you think that means—sometimes turn out to be wrong, or
to do horrible things. That should not be less true in the narratives of
LARPs.

**Use your best players well.** There are a few precious LARPers who are
reliably capable of engaging fully with the worst aspects of their
characters. Sometimes they can even be identified through casting
questionnaires (although surveys tend to generate false positives on
this front). If you have access to any of these wonderful players, stick
them with the PCs that will make the best use of their talents—the PCs
who are most damaged, narratively, when they veer towards
plaster-sainthood.

**Know when to give up.** There are some ways in which you just can’t
make PCs be bad, and so there are some stories that you basically can’t
tell through the medium of theater LARP. Unless you have a brilliant new
idea, it’s probably best just to steer clear of these rather than
letting your game shatter on the rocks of emergent PC morality.

The most infamous of these is the standard-model “gay plot.” LARP
stories about about entrenched anti-homosexual prejudice in society will
pretty much always fail, because PCs *really* don’t want to be
prejudiced against gay people, and it’s basically impossible to give
them any good reason why they should be. So you end up with
“anti-homosexual prejudice” that isn’t actually entrenched at all, and
before long everyone becomes enlightened and basks in the warm
comforting glow of tolerance.

Things play out similarly with other social-justice-type issues (racism,
sexism, etc.) where your PCs will have been drilled on a single
morally-correct outlook and will be very uncomfortable expressing or
embodying anything else. You can get around this to *some* extent by
using fantasy or science-fictional elements to distance the PCs from the
real-world version of the issue—LARPers are happier to discriminate
against demons than against goblins, and happier to discriminate against
goblins than against humans with different-colored skin—but even the
“distanced” version of such a trope is likely to run into enormous
psychological resistance.

Whatever story you want to tell, ask yourself, “can I truly see my
players being willing to take on their proper parts in this story?” If
you can’t, try something else.

<p class="text-center">
  <span class="black-square"></span>
</p>

But, of course, LARPing is a collaborative art form. The task of letting
a game tell a brilliant story does not rest with the authors alone. In
many ways, a game must stand or fall on the strength of its players.

I’d like to end this with an exhortation to anyone who plans to LARP in
the foreseeable future: the next time you take on a PC role, *let
yourself be bad*.

In fact…do more than that. Before the game, actively think about the
ways in which your character is a flawed person. Decide on one cowardly,
prejudiced, or unethical thing that he’s likely to do if given the
chance. Come up with a moral test that, if he finds himself faced with
it, he is likely to fail.

Later on, when you think about the narrative you spun for yourself in
that LARP, you’ll be glad you did.

<hr/>

*Warren Tusk has been writing LARPs for ten years, and his games have
been featured at conventions, theaters, and private events around the
world. Some of his work is commercially available through Paracelsus
Games.*

[^1]: Here I refer primarily to the so-called “theater LARPing”
    tradition of the American Northeast; the Harvard-derived community
    first and foremost, but also communities that grew out of Brandeis
    and Smith and RPI, and to some extent the somewhat broader and more
    heterogenous group that collects at Intercon.

[^2]: *The Song and the Sunrise by Warren Tusk, Matt Granoff, and Weiyi
    Guo*. Produced by Warren Tusk. Harvard-Radcliffe Science Fiction
    Association, Cambridge, MA. March 9, 2007. Production of live-action
    roleplaying game.

[^3]: Tusk, Warren and Ada Palmer. *Neon Genesis Revolution*. “Character
    Sheet—Touga Kiryuu.” 13. 2009. Live-action roleplaying game.

[^4]: Tusk, Warren and Ada Palmer. *Neon Genesis Revolution*. “Character
    Sheet—Misato Katsuragi.” 8. 2009. Live-action roleplaying game.

[^5]: Tusk, Warren. *The Dance and the Dawn*. “Character Sheet—The Queen
    and the Duke.” 2006. Live-action roleplaying game.
